2025120113
==========

--- Page 1 ---
SET 1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE- BOARD EXAMINATION (2025-26)
CLASS-XII
SUBJECT: ENGLISH CORE (301)
Maximum Marks: 80 Maximum Time allowed: 3 Hrs.
General Instruction:
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them:
(i) This paper has 13 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) This question paper contains three sections - Section A: Reading Skills, Section B :
Creative Writing and Section C : Literature
(iii) Attempt all questions based on specific instructions for each part. Write the correct
question number and part thereof in your answer sheet.
(iv) Separate instructions are given with each question/ part, wherever necessary
(v) Adhere to the prescribed word limit while answering the questions.
SECTION A: READING SKILLS (22 marks)
1. R ead the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
1 When we think of the game of cricket, we come to the conclusion that it is primarily
a game that depends on outstanding physical activities, good hand-eye co-
ordination, speed, skill and strength. It provides entertainment and generates
strong feelings of excitement. A good match of cricket or of any other game neither
adds to the existing stock of human knowledge nor reveals any secret of
existence. It does not carry any deep meaning but most people, particularly the
lover of sports attach deep emotions and numerous meanings to it. Games are
thought of as a metaphor for life. They are supposed to teach many lessons. In
fact, more is said and written about a cricket match than about scientific findings
or great philosophy.
2 This is because games, like a morality play, in which settings and rules are made
by us, can easily make people test their fair and foul conduct, principles of reward
and punishment, and emotions of joy and disappointment. They can make us
experience the thrill of war without exposing us to its dangers. A man watching a
cricket match on T.V. and munching popcorn is like a surrogate warrior. In fact,
games provide us with a safe outlet for our aggressiveness. If games become
aggressive, they lose the very purpose of providing entertainment and purging us
of our aggressiveness. They can calm our impatience without creating any conflict.
3 Commentators, journalists, politicians and analysts can do a great favour to the
competing teams by keeping the excitement within limits. The teams should play
without being dominated by feelings of national honour and shame. Excellent
performance of the players of both teams should be enjoyed and appreciated.
Winning or losing in a game should not be taken seriously. A game is fun if it is
played with true spirit of sportsmanship.
Based on your understanding of the passage, answer the questions given 12
below :
(i) Complete the sentence by choosing an appropriate option : 1
Most people conclude that cricket is primarily a game because ______.
(a) it is played as a match
(b) it requires two teams
(c) it includes physical activity, skill and coordination
(d) it teaches deep philosophical lessons
Page 1 of 11

--- Page 2 ---
(ii) Comment on the writer’s reference to the idea that cricket does not reveal any 2
secret of existence.
(iii) List two responses which watching a game of cricket gives rise to. 1
(iv) Select the option that conveys the opposite of ‘destroy’ from words used in the 1
passage.
(a) reveals
(b) experience
(c) generate
(d) purging
(v) The writer would not agree with the given statements based on paragraph 2, 1
EXCEPT
(a) Rules of any game are made by people.
(b) Watching a cricket match makes the viewer believe that he is fighting a battle
(c) It is necessary for a game to be aggressive in order to build excitement.
(d) A game can test people’s sense of fair judgement.
(vi) With reference to the passage, what does the phrase ‘surrogate warrior’ suggest 1
about a spectator? Choose the option that best describes this phrase :
(a) a spectator who is paid to watch.
(b) a spectator who is in pain while watching the match.
(c) a spectator who enjoys the match as an armchair soldier.
(d) a spectator who makes judgement about reward and punishment.
(vii) Why does the writer compare games to a morality play ? 2
(viii) Complete the given sentence with an appropriate inference: 1
The writer says that games can calm our impatience without creating any conflict
by __________.
(ix) The writer advises the players that games should not become aggressive 1
because ____________.
(x) Select the most suitable title for the above passage. 1
(a) Excellent Performance by Cricketers
(b) The Benefits of Playing Cricket
(c) Cricket – The King of Games
(d) The True Spirit of Playing Games
2. Read the passage given below : 10
(1) Adolescent Mental Health — A Growing Global Concern
(Adapted from WHO “Adolescent Mental Health Data Portal” & UNICEF India
Country Report 2023)
In the past decade, mental health has emerged as a central concern in global
adolescent well-being. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that
nearly one in every seven adolescents experiences a diagnosable mental
disorder. The three most prevalent conditions are depression (32%), anxiety
(28%), and behavioural disorders (18%), while other forms of emotional distress,
such as eating disorders and substance dependence, make up about 22%. These
figures, represented in the accompanying graph, illustrate the complex landscape
of adolescent mental health and underline how emotional well-being remains
under-addressed in most educational systems.
Page 2 of 11

--- Page 3 ---
(2)
In India, the National Mental Health Survey (2023) conducted by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare highlighted that 18% of students aged 13–18 reported
persistent sadness or hopelessness during the past year. Alarmingly, only 22% of
these students had ever reached out to a counsellor or a healthcare professional.
This gap is particularly wide between urban and rural schools — with 70% of
private schools offering at least one trained counsellor, while only 24% of
government schools had such support systems. Rural adolescents remain
especially vulnerable due to the dual challenge of limited access and social stigma
surrounding mental illness.
(3)
Experts note that adolescent mental distress often goes unnoticed because
symptoms manifest subtly — through irritability, declining grades, or social
withdrawal — rather than overtly dramatic behaviour. Parents, teachers, and peers
frequently misinterpret such signs as laziness or disobedience. Compounding this
is the social stigma attached to mental health conversations; students often fear
judgment, ostracisation, or being labelled as “weak.”
(4)
In the digital age, adolescents face a new dimension of psychological stress —
cyberbullying, online comparison, and screen fatigue have intensified anxiety
levels and body-image issues. While social media has created spaces for
expression, it has also magnified insecurities. Psychologists emphasise that digital
well-being should now be viewed as a part of mental health education.
(5)
To address this growing crisis, WHO and UNICEF have urged governments to
integrate mental-health literacy into the school curriculum, train teachers to identify
early warning signs, and create peer-support networks. The introduction of toll-
free helplines and mobile-based counselling platforms has shown promise in cities
like Bengaluru and Delhi, where student-led awareness campaigns have
increased help-seeking behaviour by nearly 40% within a year.
Page 3 of 11

--- Page 4 ---
(6)
The findings reaffirm that mental health is not merely a personal concern but a
social and educational imperative. Investing in mental well-being during
adolescence means investing in a generation capable of empathy, resilience, and
responsible citizenship.
On the basis of your understanding of the passage, answer the questions 10
given below :
(i) What are the three most common mental disorders among adolescents, as 1
reported by global agencies?
(ii) According to the graph, the highest percentage of reported mental health 1
disorder among adolescents is for _______.
(iii) Which group of students in India has less access to counsellors? 1
A. Urban students
B. Rural students
C. Senior students
D. University students
(iv) The data reveals that only 22 percent of adolescents who experienced sadness 2
sought help. What does this statistic suggest about students’ attitudes or
circumstances regarding mental-health support? (Answer in about 40 words.)
(v) Fill in the blank suitably: 1
The ministry of health’s programme mainly focuses on ________ care rather
than community and school prevention. (therapeutic/curative/emergency).
(vi) Explain two reasons mentioned in the passage for why adolescent mental-health 2
problems often go untreated. (Answer in about 40 words.)
(vii) Choose the statement that is NOT addressed in the passage. 1
A. Shortage of trained professionals
B. Social stigma linked with mental illness
C. Impact of physical exercise on mental health
D. Lack of rural counselling services
(viii) Suggest one school-based initiative that could help improve early detection of 1
mental distress among students.
SECTION – B Creative Writing Skills (18 Marks)
3 Attempt any ONE from (a) and (b) given below: 4
A The Debating Society of your school is organising an inter-school debate. The
last date for submitting names for audition is Friday 17th November. There will
be on the spot trials. Draft a notice in about 50 words informing students about
the team selection time, date and venue. You are Sarita / Sarit, President,
Debating Society, Flora International School.
OR
B You are Aayush Nair, President of the Book Lovers’ Club of your school. Your
club is hosting a “Readathon 2025”—a 12-hour reading marathon—to raise
funds for literacy drives. Draft a notice in about 50 words inviting students to
register and contribute. Include necessary details.
4 Attempt any one from (a) and (b) given below: 4
Page 4 of 11

--- Page 5 ---
A Send a formal letter of invitation in 50 words to Dr. Mehra, noted novelist and
educationist, to speak on ‘The Importance of Books’. You are Lena/Sanjay,
Secretary Literary Club, S.S. Public School. Mention day, date, time and venue.
OR
B You have been invited by the Economics Society of Flora Public School for a
panel discussion on ‘Changing Economic Trends’. Due to sudden illness, you are
unable to attend the event. Write a letter in 50 words expressing your inability to
attend the programme. Mention day, date, time and venue. You are Dr. Rao.
5 Attempt any ONE from (a) and (b) given below: 5
A The newspapers today have full page advertisements promoting luxury items.
With increase in consumerism, people find it difficult to resist and soon find
themselves trapped in a world of social one upmanship. Write a letter to the
editor expressing your views on the consequences of this consumerism giving
suggestions on how to control this habit. You are Renu/Rajan.
Use the given cues along with your own ideas to compose this letter.
Consequences
 trapped in a competitive world
 social acceptability
 living beyond budgets
 mental trauma
Solutions
 responsible role of media
 make informal decisions
OR
B Mitali Kedia sees the following advertisement and wishes to apply for the
position advertised. Write a letter of application in 120 – 150 words along with a
detailed bio-data.
SKILL DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTE
Requires Part-time Trainers for Computers / Car mechanics
 The applicant must be professionally qualified.
 Must be competent in basic computer skills
 Experience-minimum 5 years as trainer
Apply within 10 days to the Director, Skill Development Institute, Meerut.
6 Attempt any ONE from (a) and (b) given below 5
Page 5 of 11

--- Page 6 ---
A There is a shift from content based to skill based education. In addition to
foundational subjects, interesting courses such as design, digital competency
and entrepreneurship are being offered to students. This breaking away from
conformity has brought out the latent potential in students as they are now
selecting courses based on choice/interest, and talent. Write an article in 120
150 words expressing your views on the topic ‘Changing Trends in Education’.
You may use the given input.
CHANGING TRENDS IN EDUCATION
THEN NOW
LIMITED SUBJECTS DIVERSE SUBJECTS
RIGID SUBJECT STREAMS INTEGRATED SYLLABUS
ACADEMIC FOCUS INTEREST/APTITUDE FOCUS
ROTE LEARNING TECHNOLOGY BASED
PEN AND PAPER COMPETENCY BASE
OR
B REVIVE PLAYTIME
 Shapes better personalities
 Builds physical and mental health
 Develops life skills
 Keeps them in touch with nature
You are Jessica/John, a budding journalist for a local daily. You covered an event
named ‘The Vanishing Joy of childhood’. The event was attended by students
and teachers of different schools. The group discussions were on how playing
makes children fitter, unstructured playing vs. high-tech toys, and how
spontaneous group play helps build life skills. Write a report in 120 -150 words
for the local daily on the event. You may use the above given input.
SECTION C Literature (40 Marks)
7 Attempt any one of the two extracts (A) and (B) given below 1 x 6
=6
(A) Read the following extract and answer the questions that follow:
In front at the edge of the road where the traffic sped,
A roadside stand too pathetically pled, I
t would not be fair to say for a dole of bread,
But for some of the money, the cash, whose flow supports
The flower of cities from sinking and withering faint.
The polished traffic passed with a mind ahead,
Or if ever aside a moment, then out of sorts
At having the landscape marred with the artless paint
Of signs that with N turned wrong and S turned wrong
(i) What is the tone of the poet in the extract? 1
Choose the correct option:
(a) optimistic
(b) resigned
(c) sympathetic
(d) indifferent
Page 6 of 11

--- Page 7 ---
(ii) With reference to the given extract, what harm has been caused by the ‘artless 1
paint’
(iii) The city is compared to ____________. 1
(a) a landscape
(b) signs of N and S
(c) a flower
(d) a dole of bread
(iv) Choose the correct option: 1
The roadside stand is
(a) at the edge of the road.
(b) marred with artless paint.
(c) like the flower of cities.
(d) well maintained.
(v) What type of expectations do the stand owners have from the city dwellers who 1
come there?
(vi) Complete the analogy with a word from the given extract. 1
donate: contribute:: dying: ___________
OR
(B) Read the following extract and answer the questions that follow :
Aunt Jennifer’s tigers prance across a screen,
Bright topaz denizens of a world of green,
They do not fear the men beneath the tree;
They pace in sleek chivalric certainty.
Aunt Jennifer’s fingers fluttering through her wool
Find even the ivory needle hard to pull.
The massive weight of uncle’s wedding band
Sits heavily upon Aunt Jennifer’s hand.
(i) Denizens of the world of green refer to ______. 1
(a) huntsmen (b) Aunt Jennifer
(c) uncle (d) tigers
(ii) Choose the option that displays the same poetic device as used in the second 1
line of the extract.
(a) heart of stone (b) trees sprouting
(c) silver spoon (d) white murder
(iii) The men setting beneath the tree are _______. 1
(iv) What quality of uncle can be inferred through these lines ? 1
(a) compassionate nature (b) courageous
(c) confident (d) dominating
(v) The tigers in the extract are symbolic of 1
(a) confidence and courage (b) confidence and gentleness
(c) cruelty and fear (d) aggression and courage
(vi) Aunt Jennifer’s tigers prance across 1
(1) the screen (2) the fields
(3) the embroidered tunic (4) the cage
Which of the following is the most appropriate choice?
(a) (1) and (2) (b) (2) and (4)
(c) (1), (2) and (3) (d) (1) and (3)
Page 7 of 11

--- Page 8 ---
8 Read the following extract and answer the questions that follow. Attempt 1 x 4
any ONE =4
(A) “Because we are born into this community, we are never given any honour or
dignity or respect; we are stripped of all that. But if we study and make progress,
we can throw away these indignities. So study with care, learn all you can. If you
are always ahead in your lessons, people will come to you of their own accord
and attach themselves to you. Work Hard and Learn”
(i) Who is the speaker? Who is he speaking to? 1
(a) Appa; Bama
(b) Bama; Amma
(c) Bama; The Zamindar
(d) Annan; Bama
(ii) Select the option that best describes the speaker in the above extract : 1
I. marginalized
II. practical
III. idealistic
IV. curious
V. aggressive
Select the most appropriate option :
(a) I and II
(b) III and IV
(c) II and IV
(d) IV and V
(iii) Complete the following statement with reference to the community : 1
The treatment meted out to the community was _________.
(iv) Which of the following summarises the author’s opinion about study ? 1
(a) Childhood should be spent in experiential learning.
(b) Studying is better than playing
(c) Studying is essential for the nation’s development
(d) Studying leads to social reforms and progress
OR
(B) Mr. Lamb: Well that needn’t stop you, you needn’t mind.
Derry: It’d stop them. They’d mind me. When they saw me here. They look at
my face and run.
Mr. Lamb: They might. They might not. You’d have to take the risk. So would
they.
Derry: No, you would, you might have me and lose all your other friends,
because nobody wants to stay near me if they can help it.
Mr. Lamb: I’ve not moved.
Derry: No …….
Mr. Lamb: When I go down the street, the kids shout ‘Lamey Lamb’. But they
still come into the Garden, into my house; it’s a game. They’re not
afraid of me. Why should they be ? Because I’m not afraid of them,
that’s why not.’
(i) The kids tease Mr. Lamb but still come into his garden. Why ? 1
(ii) Choose the best option that describes Mr. Lamb. 1
(a) headstrong (b) pessimist
(c) negligent (d) positive
Page 8 of 11

--- Page 9 ---
(iii) Choose the correct option with reference to the extract : 1
What makes Derry tell Mr. Lamb that if he comes, others would stop coming ?
(a) Mr. Lamb would not let others come.
(b) They would be repulsed by Derry.
(c) Mr. Lamb will have to choose between him and others.
(d) Derry would flare up
(iv) What does Mr. Lamb mean by ‘They might, they might not’ ? 1
9 Attempt any ONE of two extracts given : 1 x 6
=6
(A) “I sometimes find a rupee, even a ten rupee note”, Saheb says, his eyes lighting
up when you can find a silver coin in a heap of garbage, you don’t stop
scrounging, for there is hope of finding more. It seems that for children, garbage
has a meaning different from what it means to their parents. For the children it is
wrapped in wonder, for the elders it is a means of survival. One winter morning I
see Saheb standing by the fenced gate of the neighbourhood club, watching two
young men dressed in white, playing tennis. “I like the game”, he hums, content
to watch it standing behind the fence. “I go inside when no one is around” he
admits. “The gate keeper lets me use the swing.”
(i) What does the metaphor of the "fenced gate" in the passage most likely 1
symbolize in Saheb's life?
A) A barrier that protects him from danger
B) A division between his dreams and the reality he lives in
C) A place where he likes to relax and play
D) A boundary set by his parents to keep him away from strangers
(ii) Which emotion of Saheb is revealed in the phrase ‘his eyes lighting up’ ? 1
(a) anxiety (b) envy
(c) happiness (d) greed
(iii) For the elder’s garbage is _______ and for children it is _______. 1
(iv) On the basis of the extract, choose the correct option with reference to I and II 1
given below:
I. Saheb watches the game from outside.
II. Saheb had lost the previous match.
(a) I is true but II is not
(b) II is true but I is not
(c) Both I and II are true
(d) Both I and II are untrue
(v) (v) ‘Scrounging’ in the passage most nearly means. 1
(a) digging (b) searching
(c) flinging (d) burying
(vi) (vi) ‘There is hope for finding more’. Explain with reference to the above extract. 1
OR
Page 9 of 11

--- Page 10 ---
(B) “Or an actress. Now there’s real money in that. Yes, and I could may be have the
boutique on the side. Actresses don’t work full time, do they? Anyway, that or a
fashion designer. You know –something a bit sophisticated”. And she turned in
through the open street door leaving Jansie standing in the rain. “If I ever come
into money, I’ll buy a boutique”. “Huh, if you ever come into money … if you ever
come into money, you’ll buy us a blessed decent house to live in, thank you very
much.” Sophie’s father was scooping shepherd’s pie into his mouth as hard as
he could go, his plump face still grimy and sweat – marked from the day. “She
thinks money grows on trees, don’t she Dad? Said little Derek, hanging on the
back of his father’s chair.
Their mother sighed.
(i) Sophie wants to become an actress to 1
(a) become famous (b) to earn money
(c) to support her father (d) to compete with Jansie
(ii) Sophie’s father wanted Sophie to spend her money on 1
(a) her marriage (b) her career
(c) to open a boutique (d) buying a house
(iii) Sophie is daydreaming about _______. 1
(iv) The phrase ‘She thinks money grows on trees’ suggests that Sophie _____. 1
(v) Sophie’s mother’s sigh is one of 1
(a) regret (b) delight
(c) relief (d) helplessness
(vi) Read the assertion and the reason below, with reference to the given extract. 1
Assertion (A): Sophie dreams of becoming rich and leading a glamorous life.
Reason (R): She wants to open a boutique or become an actress or fashion
designer.
Choose the correct option regarding their relationship:
(a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) A is true, but R is false.
(d) A is false, but R is true.
10 Answer any FIVE out of six questions given below in about 40-50 words: 5  2
= 10
a) Why was the peddler hesitant to accompany the ironmaster to the manor house?
(The Rattrap)
b) What are the feelings of the poet about her aged mother with reference to the
poem ‘My Mother at Sixty-Six’?
c) Elaborate the ‘conflict of duties’ faced by Gandhiji.
d) How did Umberto Eco display his innovative style in the presentation of his
dissertation ? (The Interview)
e) What handicap did Doughlas suffer from? How did he overcome that? (Deep
Water)
f) What according to Pablo Neruda in the poem ‘Keeping Quiet’ is the lesson that
we should learn from mother earth?
11 Answer any TWO in about 40-50 words : 2  2
= 4
Page 10 of 11

--- Page 11 ---
a) What did the astrologers predict about the child when he was born? (The Tiger
King)
b) Give the reason for Geoff Green’s decision to involve young students in his
programme. (Journey to the end of the Earth)
c) What was the dilemma faced by Sadao on seeing the prisoner of war ?
(The Enemy)
12 Answer any ONE in about 120-150 words : 5
a) “Sophie is an escapist and a dreamer, while Franz often misses school. Analyze
how their attitudes towards life affect the outcomes for each character.”
OR
b) Both Neruda and Keats encourage humankind to pause — Neruda through silence
and self-awareness, and Keats through the appreciation of beauty.
Discuss how these poems advocate introspection as a means to achieve inner
harmony, suggesting that the remedy for chaos and despair lies not in action, but
in conscious stillness and a renewed perception of beauty.
13 Answer any ONE in about 120-150 words: 5
a) Both Derry and Dr. Sadao faced rejection — one for his appearance, the other
for his decision to help an enemy. Yet, both characters challenge societal
prejudice through human empathy.
Evaluate how these stories illustrate that understanding another person’s pain
can dissolve barriers more powerful than reason or law.
OR
b) The modern world is full of insecurity, fear, war, worry and stress. Do you think
that the third level was a medium of escape for Charley in the Third Level? What
are the ways in which we attempt to overcome such insecurities?
**********************
Page 11 of 11

--- Page 12 ---
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION (2025-26)
CLASS-XII
SUBJECT: HINDI CORE (302)
Maximum Marks : 80 Time Allowed : 3 Hours
सामान्य और आवश्यक निर्देश :-
1. इस प्रश्न पत्र में तीन खंड हैं- खंड ‘क’, खंड ‘ख’ और खंड ‘ग’ ।
2. खंड – ‘क’ में अपठित बोध पर आधाररत प्रश्न पूछे गए हैं। सभी प्रश्नो ं के उत्तर देना अठनवार्य है।
3. खंड – ‘ख’ में पाठ्यपुस्तक ‘अठभव्यक्ति और माध्यम’ से प्रश्न पूछे गए हैं। प्रश्नो ं के आंतररक ठवकल्प
ठदर्े गए हैं।
4. खंड – ‘ग’ में पाठ्यपुस्तक ‘आरोह’ और ‘ठवतान’ से प्रश्न पूछे गए हैं। प्रश्नो ं के आंतररक ठवकल्प ठदर्े
गए हैं।
5. तीनो ं खंडो ं के उत्तर देना अठनवार्य है।
6. र्थासंभव तीनो ं खंडो ं के प्रश्नो ं के उत्तर क्रमश: ठिक्तखए।
खंड क
-
प्रश्न 1. निम्ांनकत गद्ांश पर आधाररत नर्दये गए प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर र्दीनिये :
िोकतन्त्र के मूिभूत तत्व को समझा नही ं गर्ा है और इसठिए िोग समझते हैं ठक सब कु छ
सरकार कर देगी, हमारी कोई ठिम्मेदारी नही ं है। िोगो ं में अपनी पहि से ठिम्मेदारी उिाने और
ठनभाने का संस्कार ठवकठसत नही ं हो पार्ा है। फिस्वरूप देश की ठवशाि मानव शक्ति अभी खरायटे
िेती पड़ी है और देश की पूंजी उपर्ोगी बनने के बदिे आज बोझ रूप बन बैिी है। िेठकन उसे
नीदं से झकझोर कर जागृत करना है। ठकसी भी देश को महान बनाते हैं उसमें रहने वािे िोग।
िेठकन अभी हमारे देश के नागररक अपनी ठिम्मेदारी से बचते रहे हैं। चाहे सड़क पर चिने की बात
हो अथवा साफ-सफाई की बात हो, जहााँ- तहााँ हम िोगो ं को गंदगी फै िाते और बेतरतीब ढंग से
वाहन चिाते देख सकते हैं। ठफर चाहते हैं ठक सरकार सब कु छ िीक कर दे।
सरकार ने बहुत सारे कार्य ठकए हैं, इसे अस्वीकार नही ं ठकर्ा जा सकता है। वैज्ञाठनक प्रर्ोगशािाएाँ
खोिी हैं, ठवशाि बााँध बनवाएाँ हैं, फौिाद के कारखाने खोिे हैं आठद बहुत सारे काम सरकार के द्वारा
हुए हैं। पर अभी करोड़ो ं िोगो ं को कार्य में प्रेररत नही ं ठकर्ा जा सका है। वास्तव में होना तो र्ह
चाठहए ठक िोग अपनी सूझ-बूझ के साथ अपनी आंतररक शक्ति के बि पर खड़े हो ं और अपने पास
जो भी साधन- सामग्री हो उसे िेकर कु छ करना शुरू कर दें और ठफर सरकार उसमें आवश्यक
मदद करे। उदाहरण के ठिए गााँव वािे बड़ी-बड़ी पंचवर्षीर् र्ोजनाएाँ नही ं समझ सकें गे, पर वे िोग
र्ह बात जरूर समझ सकें गे ठक अपने गााँव में कहााँ कु आाँ चाठहए, कहााँ ठसंचाई की जरूरत है, कहााँ
पुि की आवश्यकता । बाहर के िोग इन सब बातो ं से अनठभज्ञ होते हैं।
(क) िोगो ं में कतयव्यपािन की भावना क्ो ं नही ं है? 1
अ. िोग इसे सरकार की ठिम्मेदारी मानते हैं | ब. िोग इसे अपनी ठिम्मेदारी मानते हैं|
स. िोग कतयव्य के बारे में नही ं जानते | द. सभी ठवकल्प सही हैं |
QP_XII_HINDI_Set-1 Page 1 of 6

--- Page 13 ---
(ख) ठनम्न कथनो ं पर ठवचार करें- 1
i. िोकतन्त्र का मूि तत्व िोगो ं की समस्त कार्ों में सीधी भागीदारी है।
ii. िोकतन्त्र में के वि सरकार िोगो ं के प्रठत उत्तरदार्ी है ।
iii. िोकतन्त्र में िोगो ं की अप्रत्यक्ष भूठमका है ।
iv. िोगो ं में िोकतन्त्र की समझ तथा संकल्पना स्पष्ट नही ं है ।
अ. के वि कथन (i) सही है ।
ब. के वि कथन (ii) सही है ।
स. कथन (i),(ii) तथा (iii) तीनो ं सही हैं ।
द. कथन (i) और (iv) दोनो ं सही हैं ।
(ग) ठनम्नठिक्तखत कथन तथा कारण को ध्यानपूवयक पढ़कर सवायठधक उपर्ुि ठवकल्प का चर्न कीठजर्े।1
कथन (A) : देश की मानव-शक्ति सुर्षुप्तावस्था में है ।
कारण (R) : देश की जनता में बदिाव हेतु कार्य करने की भावना का अभाव ठदखाई पड़ता है।
अ. कथन (A) तथा कारण (R) दोनो ं सही हैं तथा कारण कथन की सही व्याख्या करता है।
ब. कथन (A) गित है िेठकन कारण (R) सही है।
स. कथन (A) तथा कारण (R) सही हैं।
द. कथन (A) सही है िेठकन कारण (R) उसकी गित व्याख्या करता है।
(घ) सरकारी व्यवस्था में ठकस कमी की ओर िेखक ने संके त ठकर्ा है? 1
(ङ) गदर्ांश के अनुसार िोगो ं की कौन सी शक्ति को बढ़ाना है? क्ो?ं 2
(च) समाज कै से ठवकठसत हो सकता है? 2
(छ) बाहर के िोग ठकन बातो ं से अनठभज्ञ होते हैं? 2
प्रश्न 2. निम्ांनकत पद्ांश पर आधाररत प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर र्दीनिये :
सूख रहा है समर्
इसके ठहस्से की रेत
उड़ रही है आसमान में
सूख रहा है
आाँगन में रखा पानी का ठगिास
पंखुड़ी की सााँस सूख रही है
जो सुंदर चोचं मीिे गीत सुनाती थी
हर पौधा सूख रहा है
हर नदी इठतहास हो रही है
हर तािाब का ठसमट रहा है कोना
र्ही मनुष्य का कं ि सूख रहा है
वह जेब से ठनकािता है पैसे और
खरीद रहा है बोति बंद पानी
बाकी जीव क्ा करेंगे अब
न उनके पास जेब है और न बोति बंद पानी।
(क) हर नदी के इठतहास होने का क्ा तात्पर्य है? 1
अ. नदी इठतहास में थी। ब. नठदर्ो ं का अक्तस्तत्व समाप्त हो रहा है।
स. नठदर्ो ं में पानी कम बहता है। द. नठदर्ो ं का बहाव अठधक है।
QP_XII_HINDI_Set-1 Page 2 of 6

--- Page 14 ---
(ख) “सूख रहा है समर्” कथन का आशर् क्ा है? 1
अ. अभी समर् बहुत है | ब. समर् सूखने िगा है |
स. समर् समाप्त हो रहा है | द. जीवन-मूल्य समाक्तप्त के कगार पर है |
(ग)ठनम्नठिक्तखत कथन और कारण को ध्यानपूवयक पढ़कर सवायठधक उपर्ुि ठवकल्प का चर्न कीठजर्े।1
कथन (A) पंखुड़ी की सााँस सूख रही है जो सुंदर चोचं मीिे गीत सुनाती थी।
कारण (R) प्राकृ ठतक स्रोतो ं का तेजी से ह्रास हो रहा है।
अ. कथन (A) तथा कारण (R) दोनो ं सही हैं तथा कारण कथन की सही व्याख्या करता है।
ब. कथन (A) गित है िेठकन कारण (R) सही है।
स. कथन (A) तथा कारण (R) सही हैं।
द. कथन (A) सही है िेठकन कारण (R) उसकी गित व्याख्या करता है।
(घ) कठव के ददय का क्ा कारण है? 1
(ङ) ‘बाकी जीव क्ा करेंगे अब’ कथन में ठनठहत व्यंग्य क्ा है? 2
(च) काव्यांश का भाव अपने शब्ो ं में ठिखें। 2
खंड ख
-
प्रश्न 3. निम्निखखत नर्दये गए नवषयन ं में से नकसी एक नवषय पर िगभग 120 शब्न ं में रचिात्मक
िेख निखखए : 6
अ. गुम होता बचपन
ब. चुनावी वादे और सच्चाई
स. अठभव्यक्ति की स्वतन्त्रता
प्रश्न 4. निम्ांनकत प्रश्नन ं में से नकन्ी ं चार प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 40 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये: 2x4 = 8
(i) ठवशेर्ष िेखन क्ा है? उदाहरण सठहत ठिक्तखए।
(ii) रेठडर्ो नाटक तथा सामान्य नाटक में क्ा अंतर है?
(iii) नए और अप्रत्याठशत ठवर्षर्ो ं पर िेखन हमारी रचनात्मकता को बढ़ाती है, कै से?
(iv) फीचर िेखन की ठवशेर्षताओ ं को ठिक्तखए।
(v) संपादकीर् िेखन से क्ा समझते हैं?
प्रश्न 5. निम्ांनकत में से नकन्ी ं र्दन प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 80 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये: 4 x 2 = 8
(i) टेिीठविन समाचार के चरण ‘डराई एंकर’ और ‘फोन इन’ के बारे में बताइए ।
(ii) समाचार की उल्टा ठपराठमड शैिी से आप क्ा समझते हैं?
(iii) पत्रकार ठकसे कहते हैं ? पत्रकार के ठवठभन्न प्रकार को संक्षेप में समझाइए |
QP_XII_HINDI_Set-1 Page 3 of 6

--- Page 15 ---
खंड ग
-
प्रश्न 6. निम्निखखत पनित काव्ांश पर आधाररत प्रश्नन ं के निए सवाानधक उपयुक्त नवकल्प चुिकर
निखखए : 1 x 5 = 5
हाँसते हैं छोटे पौधे िघुभार
शस्य अपार,
ठहि – ठहि
क्तखि – क्तखि
हाथ ठहिाते,
तुझे बुिाते
ठवप्लव रव से छोटे ही हैं शोभा पाते।
अट्टाठिका नही ं है रे
आतंक भवन
सदा पंक पर ही होता
जि- ठवप्लव- प्लावन
क्षुद्र प्रफु ल्ल जिज से
सदा छिकता नीर
रोग-शोक में भी हाँसता है
शैशव का सुकु मार शरीर
रुद्ध कोर्ष है, क्षुब्ध तोर्ष
अंगना अंग से ठिपटे भी
आतंक अंक पर कााँप रहे हैं
धनी, वज्र-गजयन से बादि
त्रस्त नर्न मुख ढााँप रहे हैं |
(क) ‘ठवप्लव रव से छोटे ही हैं शोभा पाते’- र्हााँ ‘छोटे’ शब् प्रर्ुि हुआ है- 1
अ. शोठर्षत वगय के ठिए ब. शोर्षक वगय के ठिए
स. मध्यम वगय के ठिए द. उच्च वगय के ठिए
(ख) जि- ठवप्लव प्लावन ठकस पर होता है? 1
अ. जिज पर ब. नौका पर स. कीचड़ पर द. नभ पर
(ग) कठव ने अट्टाठिकाओ ं को क्ा कहा है? 1
अ. राजमहि ब. सभा भवन स. व्यार्ामशािा द. आतंक भवन
(घ) ठनम्नांठकत कथन और कारण को ध्यानपूवयक पढ़कर सवायठधक उपर्ुि ठवकल्प चुनकर ठिक्तखए। 1
कथन (A) शोठर्षत वगय बादि अथायत क्रांठत का आह्वान करता है।
कारण (R) शोर्षक वगय अट्टाठिकाओ ं में जनता के ठिए र्षड्यंत्र रचते हैं।
अ. कथन (A) सही है और कारण (R) गित है।
ब. कथन (A) गित है और कारण (R) सही है।
स. कथन (A) सही है और कारण (R) कथन (A) की सही व्याख्या करता है।
द. कारण (R) गित है।
QP_XII_HINDI_Set-1 Page 4 of 6

--- Page 16 ---
(ङ) ठवप्लव का वीर कौन है और उसे कौन बुिाता है? 1
अ. बादि, और उसे व्याकु ि मजदूर बुिाता है
ब. क्रांठतकारी, और उसे व्याकु ि कृ र्षक बुिाता है
स. बादि, उसे व्याकु ि कृ र्षक बुिाता है
द. उपर्ुयि में से कोई नही ं
प्रश्न 7. निम्ांनकत प्रश्नन ं में से नकन्ी ं र्दन प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 60 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये : 3 x 2 = 6
(क) बात और भार्षा परस्पर जुड़े होते हैं, ठकन्तु कभी-कभी भार्षा के चक्कर में सीधी बात भी
टेढ़ी हो जाती है। कै से?
(ख) ‘परदे पर वि की कीमत है’- कहकर कठव ने पूरे साक्षात्कार के प्रठत अपना नजररर्ा
ठकस रूप में रखा है?
(ग) ‘उर्षा’ कठवता गााँव की सुबह का गठतशीि शब्-ठचत्र है- सोदाहरण स्पष्ट कीठजर्े।
प्रश्न 8. निम्ांनकत प्रश्नन ं में से नकन्ी ं र्दन प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 40 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये: 2 x 2 = 4
(क) पतंगो ं के साथ-साथ वे भी उड़ रहे हैं- बच्चो ं का उड़ान से कै सा संबंध बनता है?
(ख) शोकग्रस्त माहौि में हनुमान जी के अवतरण को करुण रस के बीच वीर रस का
आगमन क्ो ं कहा गर्ा है?
(ग) ‘आत्मपररचर्’ में कठव के कथन ‘शीति वाणी में आग ठिए ठफरता हाँ’- का ठवरोधाभास
स्पष्ट करें।
प्रश्न 9. निम्निखखत गद्ांश पर आधाररत प्रश्नन ं के निए सही नवकल्प चुनिये : 1 x 5 = 5
बािार में एक जादू है। वह जादू आाँख की राह काम करता है। वह रूप का जादू है। पर
जैसे चुंबक का जादू िोहे पर ही चिता है, वैसे ही इस जादू की भी मर्ायदा है। जेब भरी हो और
मन खािी हो, ऐसी हाित में बािार का असर खूब होता है। जेब खािी पर मन भरा न हो तो भी
जादू चि जाएगा। मन खािी है, तो बािार की अनेकानेक चीजो ं का ठनमंत्रण उस तक पहुाँच जाएगा।
कही ं हुई उस वि जेब भरी, तब तो वह मन ठकसकी मानने वािा है। मािूम होता है र्ह भी िूाँ,
वह भी िूाँ। सभी सामान जरूरी और आराम को बढ़ाने वािा मािूम होता है। पर र्ह सब जादू का
असर है। जादू की सवारी उतरी ठक पता चिता है ठक फ़ै न्सी चीजो ं की बहुतार्त आराम में मदद
नही ं देती, बक्ति खिि ही डािती हैं। थोड़ी देर को स्वाठभमान को जरूर सेंक ठमि जाती है पर
इससे अठभमान की ठगल्टी को और खुराक ही ठमिती है।
(क) िेखक के अनुसार बािार के जादू की क्ा मर्ायदा है?
अ. वह के वि उन िोगो ं पर असर करता है, ठजनके मन खािी होते हैं।
ब. वह के वि उन िोगो ं पर असर करता है, जो वस्तु खरीदने आते हैं।
स. वह के वि अमीर िोगो ं पर असर करता है।
द. वह के वि गरीब िोगो ं पर असर करता है।
(ख) बािारवाद को कौन बढ़ावा देता है?
अ. मन का खािीपन ब. मन का भरा होना
स. जेब का खािीपन द. मन का बंद होना
(ग) बािार का जादू उतरने पर क्ा पता चिता है?
अ.आकर्षयक चीजें उपर्ोगी होती हैं |
QP_XII_HINDI_Set-1 Page 5 of 6

--- Page 17 ---
ब. आकठर्षयत करनेवािी चीजें हमारे जीवन में महत्व नही ं रखती हैं |
स. आकठर्षयत करनेवािी चीजें स्वाठभमान को बचाती हैं |
द. आकर्षयण ही व्यक्ति को जीना ठसखाता है |
(घ) ठनम्नांठकत कथन-कारण को ध्यानपूवयक पढ़कर ठदर्े गए ठवकल्पो ं में से सही ठवकल्प चुठनर्े :
कथन (A) बािार का जादू उतरने पर वस्तु खरीदने की व्यथयता का पता चिता है।
कारण (R) बािार का जादू आाँखो ं के माध्यम से हमें आकठर्षयत करता है।
अ. कथन (A) तथा कारण (R) दोनो ं सही हैं तथा कारण कथन की सही व्याख्या करता है।
ब. कथन (A) गित है तथा कारण (R) सही है।
स. कथन (A) तथा कारण (R) दोनो ंगित हैं।
द. कारण (R) कथन (A) की गित व्याख्या करता है।
(ङ) गदर्ांश के आधार पर ठनम्नांठकत कथनो ं पर ठवचार करें -
i. सभी आकठर्षयत करने वािी वस्तुएाँ उपर्ोगी होती हैं।
ii. बािार का जादू उसके रूप का जादू है।
iii. बािार का जादू टूटने पर व्यक्ति को अफसोस होता है।
iv. वस्तुओ ं को खरीदने से तात्काठिक रूप से व्यक्ति को आत्मसंतोर्ष प्राप्त होता है।
उपर्ुयि कथनो ं में से कौन-सा/ कौन-से कथन सत्य है/हैं?
अ. (i) और (ii) ब. (iii) और (iv)
स. सभी कथन सत्य हैं | द. (i) को छोड़कर सभी कथन सत्य हैं |
प्रश्न 10. निम्ांनकत प्रश्नन ं में से नकन्ी ं र्दन प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 60 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये: 2 x 3 = 6
(क) भक्तिन के तीन चाररठत्रक दुगुयण बताइए।
(ख) िुट्टन पहिवान की बाल्यावस्था का पररचर् दीठजर्े।
(ग) जाठत-प्रथा को श्रम ठवभाजन का ही एक रूप न मानने के पीछे अंबेडकर जी के क्ा तकय
हैं ?
प्रश्न 11. निम्ांनकत प्रश्नन ं में से नकन्ी ं र्दन प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 40 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये: 2 x 2 = 4
(क) हजारी प्रसाद ठद्ववेदी जी ने ठशरीर्ष की तुिना ठकस महान व्यक्तित्व से की है और क्ो?ं
(ख) बाबा साहब अंबेडकर ने आदशय समाज के ठिए ठकन तीन तत्वो ं को आवश्यक माना है?
स्पष्ट करें।
(घ) इंदर सेना पर पानी फें के जाने को िेखक अंधठवश्वास कहता है परंतु जीजी ठकन तकों से
उसे खंठडत करती है? स्पष्ट कीठजर्े।
प्रश्न 12. निम्ांनकत प्रश्नन ं में से नकन्ी ं र्दन प्रश्नन ं के उत्तर िगभग 60 शब्न ं में र्दीनिये: 2x5 = 10
(क) ‘ठसल्वर वैठडंग’ पाि के आधार पर बताइए ठक जीवन - मूल्य समर् के साथ बदि रहे
हैं।
(ख) ‘जूझ’ कहानी के कहानीकार के ठशठक्षत होने के संघर्षय में दत्ता जी राव देसाई के र्ोगदान
को स्पष्ट कीठजर्े।
(ग) िेखक ने मुअनजोदड़ो की नगर र्ोजना की तुिना आज के नगरो ं से ठकस प्रकार की
है?
-----------******-------------
QP_XII_HINDI_Set-1 Page 6 of 6

--- Page 18 ---
SET – 1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGTHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE – BOARD EXAMINATIION (2025-26)
CLASS: XII
Subject: MATHEMATICS
Maximum Marks = 80 Maximum Time Allowed = 3 Hours
General Instructions: Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them:
(i) This Question paper contains 38 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) This Question paper is divided into five Sections - A, B, C, D and E.
(iii) In Section A, Questions no. 1 to 18 are multiple choice questions (MCQs) and Questions
no. 19 and 20 are Assertion-Reason based questions of 1 mark each.
(iv) In Section B, Questions no. 21 to 25 are Very Short Answer (VSA)-type questions,
carrying 2 marks each.
(v) In Section C, Questions no. 26 to 31 are Short Answer (SA)-type questions, carrying 3
marks each.
(vi) In Section D, Questions no. 32 to 35 are Long Answer (LA)-type questions, carrying 5
marks each.
(vii) In Section E, Questions no. 36 to 38 are Case study-based questions, carrying 4 marks
each.
(viii) There is no overall choice. However, an internal choice has been provided in 2
questions in Section B, 3 questions in Section C, 2 questions in Section D and one subpart
each in 2 questions of Section E.
S.NO. SECTION A
Marks
1 The domain of the function y = sin−1(−𝑥2) is 1
(A) [0, 1] (B) (0, 1) (C) [–1, 1] (D) [–1, 0]
2 1 1 1
If A = [ ]. Then A100 is .
1 1
(A) 100A (B) 99A (C) 299A (D) 2100A
3 . Total number of possible matrices of order 3 × 3 with diagonal entries are ± 2 1
and non - diagonal entries are -1, 0 and 1
(A) 29 (B) 39 (C) 2336 (D) 2633
4 6i −3𝑖 1 1
If | 4 3𝑖 −1| = x+iy ,where i = √−1 , then (x,y) =
20 3 𝑖
(A) (2, 3) (B) (0, 3) (C) (3, 1) (D) (0, 0)
5 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛼 1
If A(α) = [ ] , then the matrix A2(α) is equal to
−𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛼 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼
A. A(2α) B. A(α) C. A(3α) D. A(4α)

--- Page 19 ---
6 1 2 1
If A=[ ]. Then |2A| is.
4 2
(A) 2|A| (B) 4|A| (C) 8|A| (D) 8|A|
7 𝑑2𝑦 1
If x = t2 and y = t3 then
𝑑𝑥2
3 3𝑡 3 3
(A) (B) (C) (D)
2 2 4𝑡 2𝑡
8 The maximum value of f(x) = sinx.cosx is 1
1 −1
A. B. C. 0 D. 5
2 2
9 The value of integration ∫𝑒𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑐 𝑥 (1+𝑡𝑎𝑛 𝑥) 𝑑𝑥 is 1
(A) 𝑒𝑥 𝑐𝑜𝑠 𝑥 +𝑐 (B) 𝑒𝑥𝑠𝑒𝑐 𝑥 + 𝑐 (C) 𝑒𝑥 𝑠𝑖𝑛 𝑥 + 𝑐 (D) 𝑒𝑥 𝑡𝑎𝑛 𝑥 + 𝑐
10 If ∫ 𝑎 𝑓(2𝑎−𝑥)𝑑𝑥 = m and ∫ 𝑎 𝑓(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 = n , then ∫ 2𝑎 𝑓(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 is equal to 1
0 0 0
(A) 2m +n (B) m + 2n (C) m - n (D) m + n
11 The area bounded by y = logx, x-axis and ordinates x = 1, and x = 2 is 1
(A) log2 (B) log(2/e) (C) log(4/e) (D) log4
12. The integrating factor of the differential equation : (𝑥𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑥) 𝑑𝑦 +𝑦 =2𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑥 is:
𝑑𝑥
(A) ex (B) logx (C) log(logx) (D) x
13 5 1
𝑑𝑦 2 2 𝑑3𝑦
The order and degree of the differential equation {1+10( ) } = are
𝑑𝑥 𝑑𝑥3
p and q respectively, then relation between p and q are
(A) p = 3q (B) ) 2p = 3q (C) 3p = 2q (D) 3 p = q
14 If |𝑎⃗| = 2, |𝑏⃗⃗ | = 7 and 𝑎⃗ x 𝑏⃗⃗= 3𝑖 ̂ + 2𝑗 ̂ + 6 𝑘 ̂ , then the angle between 𝑎⃗ and 𝑏⃗⃗. 1
5𝜋 2𝜋 𝜋 𝜋
(A) (B) (C) (D)
6 3 3 6
15 If 𝑎⃗ , 𝑏⃗⃗ and 𝑐⃗ are mutually perpendicular unit vectors, then the value of |2⃗⃗⃗⃗𝑎⃗ + 1
𝑏⃗⃗+ 𝑐⃗ |2
(A) -6 (B) 6 (C) ±6 (D) √6
16 An objective function of a linear programming problem is 1
(A) a constraint (B) a function to be optimized
(C) a relation between the variables (D) none of these
17 Which of the points is not a corner point of this problem: 1
Max z = x + y subject to the constraints 2x + y ≤ 50, x + 2y ≤ 40 , x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0 .
(A)(3, 4) (B)(0, 0) C. (0, 20) (D) (25, 0)
18 If A and B are any two events such that P(A) + P(B) – P(AꓵB) = P(A) then 1
𝐵 𝐵 𝐴 𝐴
(A) P( ) = 1 (B) P( ) = 0 (C) P( ) = 1 (D) P( ) = 0
𝐴 𝐴 𝐵 𝐵
ASSERTION & REASON
19 Assertion (A): The range of the function 𝑓(𝑥) = 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛−1 𝑥 + 3𝜋 , 1
2

--- Page 20 ---
𝜋 5𝜋
where ∈ [ 1 ,1],𝑖𝑠 [ , ] .
2 2
Reason (R): The range of the principal value branch of 𝑠𝑖𝑛−1 (𝑥) is [0, 𝜋 ].
(A) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(B) Both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A).
(C) (A) is true but (R) is false.
(D) (A) is false but (R) is true.
20 (Assertion): The function f(x) = x2−6x+8 is strictly increasing for x>3 1
(Reason): A function has maximum value at point x=a, if f′(a)=0 and
f ′′ (a)<0
(A) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(B) Both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A).
(C) (A) is true but (R) is false.
(D) (A) is false but (R) is true.
SECTION B
21 Express tan -1 ( cosx ), 𝜋 ˂ x ˂ 3𝜋 in the simplest form. 2
1−sinx 2 2
OR
-1 -11 -1
Find the value of tan [ 2cos( 2sin )] + tan ( 1 ).
2
22 2
Find the derivative of sinx with respect to ecosx.
23
If x = 𝑒y+ ey+ey...... , then find the value of dx .
dy
OR
𝑎𝑥+3 , 𝑖𝑓 𝑥 ≤ 1
If 𝑓(𝑥) = { , then the values of a for which f is continuous for
𝑎2𝑥 − 1 , 𝑖𝑓 𝑥 > 1
all x.
24 If 𝑎⃗ + 𝑏⃗⃗+ 𝑐⃗= 0 and |𝑎⃗| = 3 , |𝑏⃗⃗| = 5 and |𝑐⃗| = 7, show that angle between 𝑎⃗ 2
and ⃗𝑏⃗⃗⃗ is 60o.
25 Find the magnitude of each of the two vectors 𝑎⃗ and 𝑏⃗⃗, having the same 2
9
magnitude such that the angle between them is 600 and their scalar product is
2
.
SECTION C
26 Find two positive numbers whose sum is 24 and product is maximum. 3
OR

--- Page 21 ---
The radius of a cylinder is increasing at the rate of 3m/s and its altitude is
decreasing at the rate of 4m/s . The rate of change of volume when radius is
4m and altitude is 6m.
27 Find the intervals in which the function f given by 𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑥3−12𝑥²+36𝑥+17 is 3
increasing or decreasing.
28 π/2 3
Evaluate ∫ log sinx dx
0
OR
secx tanx dx
Evaluate ∫
√3 − 2𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑥 − 𝑠𝑒𝑐2𝑥
29 Find the points on line 𝑥 + 2 = 𝑦 + 1 = 𝑧 − 3 at a distance of 5 units from the point 3
3 2 2
P (1, 3, 3 )
30 Solve the following LPP graphically: Maximize: Z = x +2 y 3
Subject to the constraints x + 2y ≥ 100, 2𝑥−𝑦 ≤ 0 ,2𝑥+𝑦 ≤ 200 and
x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0.
OR
Solve the following Linear Programming Problem graphically:
Minimise: 𝑍 = 𝑥+2𝑦
Subject to constraint: 2𝑥+𝑦 ≥ 3,𝑥+2𝑦 ≥ 6,𝑥,𝑦 ≥ 0
Show graphically that the minimum of Z occurs at more than two points.
31 A black and a red die are rolled together. Find the conditional probability of 3
obtaining the sum 8, given that the red die resulted in a number less than 4.
SECTION D
32 1 1 1 5
If A = [1 0 2] , find A-1 . Hence, solve the system of equations x + y + z = 6 ,
3 1 1
x + 2z = 7 , 3x + y + z = 12
33 Differentiate w.r.t. x : (sinx + cosx )( sinx − cosx )+ (logx)tanx 5
34 Using integration, find the area of the region bounded by the triangle whose 5
vertices are (-1, 0), (1, 3) and (3, 2).
OR
Find the area of the region bounded by the curve 4x2 + y2 = 36 using
integration.
35 Show that the lines r⃗ = (î +̂ j - ̂k)+λ(3̂i -j)̂ and r⃗ = (4i ̂-k̂)+(2̂i +3k̂) 5
intersect. Also find their point of intersection and angle between them.
OR
Find the coordinates of the foot of perpendicular and the length of the
x+1 y−3 z−1
perpendicular drawn from the point P(5, 4, 2 ) to the line = = .
2 3 −1
Also, find the image of P in this line.

--- Page 22 ---
SECTION E
36 An organization conducted bike race under 2 different categories - boys and
girls. Totally there were 250 participants. Among all of them finally three from
Category 1 and two from Category 2 were selected for the final race. Ravi
forms two set B and G with these participants for his college project. Let where
B represents the set of boys selected and G the set of girls who were selected
for the final race.
Ravi decides to explore these sets for various types of relations and functions
(A) Ravi wishes to form all the relations possible from B to G. How many such
relations are possible.
(B) Ravi wants to know among those relations; how many functions can be
formed from B to G.
(C) Let a relation be defined by R = { (b , b ): b and b both are boys}, Show
b 1 2 1 2
that this relation R is equivalence relation.
OR
(C) Let a relation be defined by R = { (g , g ): g and g both are girls}, Show
g 1 2 1 2
that this relation R is equivalence relation.
37 The relation between the height of the plant (y in cm) with respect to exposure
to sunlight is governed by the following equation
𝑥2
y = 4x - where x is the number of days exposed to sunlight.
2

--- Page 23 ---
(A) Find the rate of growth of the plant with respect to sunlight.
(B) What is the number of days it will take for the plant to grow to the maximum
height.
(C) Verify that height of the plant is maximum after four days by second
derivative test and find the maximum height of plant.
OR
(C) What will be the height of the plant after 2 days.

--- Page 24 ---
38 A doctor is to visit a patient. From the past experience, it is known that the 4
probabilities that he will come by train, bus, scooter or by other means of
3 1 1 2
transport are respectively , , and .The probabilities that he will be late
10 5 10 5
1 1 1
are , and if he comes by train, bus and scooter respectively, but if he
4 3 12
comes by other means of transport, then he will not be late. On the basis of
above information, answer the following questions.
(A) Find the probability that he is late.
(B) When he arrives, he is late. What is the probability that he comes by train.
(C) When he arrives, he is late. What is the probability that he comes by bus.
OR
(C) When he arrives, he is late. What is the probability that he comes by
scooter.

--- Page 25 ---
SET-1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION 2025-26
CLASS XII SUBJECT: PHYSICS (042)
MAXIMUM MARKS: 70 TIME ALLOWED: 3 HOURS
General Instructions:
(i) This question paper contains 33 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) This question paper has five sections: Section A, B, C , D and E.
(iii) In Section A- Questions no. 1 to 16 are Multiple Choice type questions. Each
question carries 1 mark .
(iv) In Section B- Questions no. 17 to 21 are Very Short Answer type questions. Each
question carries 2 mark .
(v) In Section C-Questions no. 22 to 28 are Short Answer type questions. Each
question carries 3 marks .
(vi) In section D-Questions no. 29 and 30 are case study-based questions. Each
question carries 4 marks .
(vii) In section E- Questions no-31 to 33 are long Answer type questions. Each
question carries 5 marks .
(viii) There is no overall choice. However, an internal choice has been provided in few
questions in all sections except Section A.
(ix) Use of calculator is not allowed.
(x) You may use the following values of physical constants wherever necessary:
c = 3x108m/s , h = 6.63x10-34Js , e = 1.6x10-19C , µ = 4π x 10-7 TmA-1,
o
𝟏
ε = 8.854 x 10-12 C2N-1m-2 , = 9 x 109 Nm2C-2 ,
o
𝟒𝝅𝝐𝒐
Mass of electron = 9.1 x 10-31 Kg
Mass of neutron = 1.675 x 10-27Kg
Mass of proton = 1.673 x 10-27 Kg
Avogadro’s number = 6.023 x 1023 per gram mole
Boltzmann constant = 1.38 x 10-23 JK-1.
SECTION-A
Q.N QUESTION MM
1 The plates of a parallel plate capacitor are 4cm apart, the first plate is at 300V
and second plate at -100 V. The voltage at 3 cm from the second plate is
(a) 200V (b) 400V (c) 250V (d) 500 V 1
2 The drift velocity of the free electrons in a conducting wire carrying a current is
v. If in a wire of the same metal, but of double the radius, the current be 2I,
then the drift velocity of the electrons will be 1
(a) v/4 (b) v/2 (c) v (d) 4v
3 A heater coil rated as (P,V) is cut into two equal parts. One of the part is then
connected to a battery of V volt. The power consumed by it will be 1
(a) P (b) P/2 (c) P/4 (d) 2P

--- Page 26 ---
Beams of electron and protons move parallel to each other in the same
direction. They 1
4 (a)Attract each other (b) repel each other
(c) neither repel nor attract (d) attraction or repulsion depends upon
speed of beam
5 The phase difference between Current and voltage in LCR series circuit at a
stage when the impedance of circuit become minimum is:
(a)π (b) π/2 (c) π/3 (d) Zero 1
6 When we move magnetic compass from point P to Q then which of the 1
following statement is true
(a) The deflection of the magnetic needle at P and Q will be in the same
direction.
(b) The deflection of the magnetic needle at P and Q will be in the opposite
directions.
(c) The deflection of the magnetic needle at P and Q will be perpendicular to
each other
(d)The deflection of the magnetic needle at P and Q will be inclined at 45o with
respect to each other
7 The rms value of the alternating current shown in figure
1
a) Zero b) 2A c) 4A d) 16A
8 Displacement current exists only when
a) Electric field is changing
b) Magnetic field is changing
c) Electric filed is not changing 1
d) Both electric and magnetic fields are not changing.

--- Page 27 ---
9 For a glass prism , the angle of minimum deviation will be smallest for the light
of 1
a) Red colour b) blue colour c) yellow colour d) green colour
10 When a wave undergoes reflection at an interface from rarer to denser
medium, adhoc change in its phase is 1
a) π/2 b) 0 c) π d) π/4
11 When an electron in an atom goes from a lower to a higher orbit, its
a) kinetic energy increases, potential energy decreases
b) kinetic energy increases, potential energy increases 1
c) kinetic energy decreases, potential energy increases
d) kinetic energy decreases, potential energy decreases
12 The curve of binding energy per nucleon as a function of atomic mass number
has a sharp peak for Helium nucleus. This implies that Helium nucleus is
a) Radioactive b) unstable 1
c) easily fissionable d) more stable nucleus than its
neighbours
For Questions 13 to 16, two statements are given one labelled Assertion (A) and other
labelled Reason (R). Select the correct answer to these questions from the options as
given below.
(A) Both Assertion and Reason are true and Reason is the correct explanation of Assertion.
(B) Both Assertion and Reason are true but Reason is not the correct explanation of Assertion.
(C) Assertion is true but Reason is false.
(D) Both Assertion and Reason are false.
13 Assertion : Electrostatic field lines start at positive charges and end at
negative charges.
Reason : Fields lines are continuous curves without any breaks and they form 1
closed loop.
14 Assertion : The focal length of a concave mirror is f & an object is placed at a
distance x from the focus. The magnification produced by the mirror is f/x.
Reason : Magnification =size of image/size of object. 1
15 Assertion : When the apparatus of Youngs double Slits Experiment is brought
in a liquid from air, the fringe width decreases. 1
Reason : The wavelength of light decreases in the liquid.
16 Assertion : The total energy of an electron revolving in any stationary orbit can
not be positive. 1
Reason : Total energy can have positive or negative values.
Section - B
17 Two charged conducting spheres of radii a and b are connected to each other
by a wire .Find the ratio of the electric fields at their surfaces. 2
18 Two wires 𝑿 and 𝒀 have the same resistivity but their cross sectional areas are
in the ratio 2:3 and lengths in the ratio 1:2. They are first connected in series 2
and then in parallel to a d.c. source. Find out the ratio of the drift speeds of the
electrons in the two wires for the two cases.
19 Electromagnetic waves with wavelengths-
(i) 𝜆 are used in TV remote controls
1
(ii) 𝜆 are used by a F.M. radio station for broadcasting
2
2
(iii) 𝜆 are used to study the crystal structure of materials
3
(iv) 𝜆 are used LASER assisted eye surgery
4
Identify the name and part of electromagnetic spectrum to which these
radiations belong. Arrange these waves in increasing order of wavelength.
20 An electron and a proton moving with the same speed, enter the same
magnetic field region at right angles to the direction of the field.
(i) Show the trajectories followed by the two particles in the region of the
magnetic field.

--- Page 28 ---
(ii) Find the ratio of the radii of the circular paths which the two particles may
describe.
2
OR
The given figure shows the variation of intensity of magnetization (I) versus
applied magnetic field intensity H for two magnetic material A and B.
a) Identify the material A and B.
b) Draw variation of Susceptibility (X) w.r.t. temperature for B.
2
21 (a) Plot a graph showing variation of de-Broglie wavelength 𝜆 versus 1 , where 2
√𝑉
𝑉 is accelerating potential for two particles 𝐴 and 𝐵 carrying same charge but
of masses 𝑚 , 𝑚 (𝑚 > 𝑚 ).
1 2 1 2
(b) Which one of the two graphs represents a particle of smaller mass and why
?
OR
Given the value of the ground state energy of hydrogen atom as −13.6 eV.
2
Find out its kinetic and potential energy in the ground and second excited
states.
SECTION-C
22 Name a device which is used in the chargers of Mobile Phone/Laptop to
convert High AC voltage into a very low DC voltage. On which property of p-n 3
junction diode does it work? Draw circuit diagram, input and output waveforms
of the device.
23 State Huygens principle. Derive 2nd law of reflection on the basis of Huygen’s
wave theory . 3
24 A given coin has a mass of 3.0 g. Calculate the nuclear energy that would be
required to separate all the neutrons and protons from each other. For 3
simplicity assume that the coin is entirely made of Cu63 atoms (of mass
29
62.92960 u). The masses of proton and neutrons are 1.00783 u and 1.00867 u
respectively.
25 Draw a schematic ray diagram of a reflecting telescope. State the advantages
of reflecting telescope over refracting telescope. 3

--- Page 29 ---
26 a) A set of ‘n’ identical resistors, each of resistance ‘R’ when connected in
series have an effective resistance ‘X’. When they are connected in
parallel, their effective resistance becomes ‘Y’.Find out the product of X
and Y.
b) A 10 V cell of negligible internal resistance is connected in parallel across a
battery of emf 200 and internal resistance 38 Ω as shown in the figure. Find the
value of current in the circuit.
3
27 A bar magnet of magnetic moment 6 J/T is aligned at 60° with a uniform
external magnetic field of 0·44 T. Calculate
(a) the work done in turning the magnet to align its magnetic moment
(i) normal to the magnetic field, (ii) opposite to the magnetic field, and 3
(b) the torque on the magnet in the final orientation in case (ii).
OR
Two identical circular coils, P and Q each of radius R, carrying currents 1 A and
√3 A respectively, are placed concentrically and perpendicular to each other 3
lying in the XY and YZ planes. Find the magnitude and direction of the net
magnetic field at the Centre of the coils
28 A small flat search coil of area 5 cm2 with 140 closely wound turns is placed
between the poles of a powerful magnet producing magnetic field 0.09 T and
then after 7 second it is removed out of the field region. Calculate 3
(a) change of magnetic flux through the coil, and
(b) emf induced in the coil.
SECTION-D
29 A PN junction diode is an essential component in many electronic circuits.
When a p-type and an n-type semiconductor are joined, a depletion region
forms at the junction. The behavior of the diode depends on whether it is
forward biased or reverse biased. In forward bias, the diode allows current to
flow, while in reverse bias, the current flow is minimal, except for a small
leakage current. This property of a p-n junction diode makes it a suitable
component for rectification of AC voltage /current easily. Consider a diode
connected in a circuit with a power supply of 5V, a resistor of 100Ω, and a
current of 40mA in forward bias.
I. What is the depletion region in a PN junction?
a. The area where excess electrons accumulate in the p-type region 1
b. The area around the junction where immobile impurity ions are present
c. The region where mobile charge carriers are highly concentrated
d. The region outside the PN junction where recombination happens
II. What is the current through a diode with a 5V supply, a 100Ω resistor, and a
0.7V forward voltage drop across the diode? 1
a. 30 mA b. 40mA
c. 43mA d. 50mA

--- Page 30 ---
III. Based on V I characteristics of the diode,we can classify diode as 1
a. Bilateral device b. Ohmic device
c. Non – Ohmic device d. All of the above
IV. Initially during the formation of PN junction
a. Diffusion current is large & drift current is small
b. Diffusion current is small & drift current is large 1
c. Both current are large
d. Both current are small
OR
IV. How does the width of the depletion region change under different bias
conditions?
a. In forward bias, it decreases; in reverse bias, it increases
b. In forward bias, it remains constant; in reverse bias, it increases
c. In forward bias, it increases; in reverse bias, it decreases 1
d. In forward bias, it increases; in reverse bias, it remains constant
30 Figure shows the variation of photoelectric current measured in a photo cell
circuit as a function of the potential difference between the plates of the photo
cell when light beams A, B, C and D of different wavelengths are incident on
the photo cell. Examine the given figure and answer the following questions:
I. Which light beam has the highest frequency?
(a) A (b) B (c) C (d) D 1
II. Which light beam ejects photoelectrons will maximum momentum?
(a) D (b) C (c) B (d) A 1
III. The stopping potential of a photocell, in which electrons with a maximum
kinetic energy of 6 eV are emitted will be
(a) –6V (b) 6V (c) 3V (d) –3V 1
IV. Sodium and copper have work functions 2.3 eV and 4.5 eV respectively.
Then the ratio of their threshold wavelengths is nearest to
(a) 1 : 2 (b) 1 : 4 (c) 2 : 1 (d) 4 : 1 1
OR
IV. Which beam of light has maximum intensity? 1
(a) D (b) C (c) A (d) B

--- Page 31 ---
SECTION-E
31 (A) Concentric equipotential surfaces due to a charged body placed at the
centre are shown. Identify the polarity of the charge and draw the electric 2+2+1
field lines due to it.
(B) Net capacitance of three identical capacitors in series is 1 µF. What will be
their net capacitance if connected in parallel?
Find the ratio of energy stored in the two configurations if they are both
connected to the same source.
(C) A charge ′𝑞’ is being moved from a point 𝐴 above a dipole of dipole
moment ′𝑝′ to a point 𝐵 below the dipole in equatorial plane without
acceleration. Find the work done in the process.
OR
(A) Consider two hollow concentric spheres, S1 & S2, enclosing charges 2Q &
2+2+1
4Q respectively as shown.
(i) Find out the ratio of the electric flux through them.
(ii) how will the electric flux through the sphere S1 change, if a medium of
dielectric constant ϵ is introduced in the space inside S1 in place of air ?
r
Deduce the necessary expression.
(B) Using Gauss’s law, obtain the expression for electric field intensity at a
point due to an infinitely large, plane sheet of charge of charge density 𝜎 =
C/m2. Draw a graph between electric field and distance of point .
(C)How is the field directed if the sheet is (i) positively charged (ii) negatively
charged?

--- Page 32 ---
32 (A) Derive lens maker’s formula.
(B) Three rays (1,2,3) of different colours fall normally on one of the sides of an 3+2
isosceles right angled prism as shown.
The refractive index of prism for these rays is 1.39, 1.47 and 1.52 respectively.
Find which of these rays get internally reflected and which get only refracted
from AC. Trace the path of rays. Justify your answer.
OR
(A) Define angle of deviation in a prism.
(B) A ray of light incident on an equilateral glass prism propagates parallel to 1+2+2
the base line of the prism inside it. Find the angle of incidence of this ray. Given
refractive index of material of glass prism is √3 .
(C) When are the two sources of light said to be coherent? No two independent
sources of light are coherent. Why?
33 (A) State the working principle of a moving coil galvanometer. Why is it
necessary to introduce a cylindrical soft iron core inside the coil of a 2+1+2
galvanometer?
(B) Increasing the current sensitivity of a galvanometer may not necessarily
increase its voltage sensitivity.” Justify this statement.
(C)The current sensitivity of a moving coil galvanometer increases by 20 %
when its resistance is increased by a factor of 2. Calculate by what factor the
voltage sensitivity changes?
OR
(A) Show a plot of variation of (i) magnetic flux and (ii) alternating emf versus
time generated by a loop of wire rotating in a magnetic field in an ac generator. 2+1+2
(B)Name that device which is a key component in the transfer of electrical
power over long distances. Also state the working principle of device.
(C)In a series 𝐿𝑅 circuit 𝑋 = 𝑅 and power factor of the circuit is 𝑃 . When
𝐿 1
capacitor with capacitance 𝐶 such that 𝑋 = 𝑋 is put in series, the power
𝐿 𝐶
factor becomes 𝑃 . Calculate 𝑃 /𝑃 .
2 1 2
______________________________________________________________________________

--- Page 33 ---
12PB24CHE04
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION 2025-26
CHEMISTRY THEORY (043)
Max. Marks:70 Time: 3 hours
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:
Read the following instructions carefully.
a) There are 33 questions in this question paper with internal choice.
b)SECTION A consists of 16 multiple-choice questions carrying 1 mark each.
c) SECTION B consists of 5 short answer questions carrying 2 marks each.
d)SECTION C consists of 7 short answer questions carrying 3 marks each.
e) SECTION D consists of 2 case-based questions carrying 4 marks each.
f) SECTION E consists of 3 long answer questions carrying 5 marks each.
g)All questions are compulsory.
h)Use of log tables and calculators are not allowed.
SECTION A
The following questions are multiple-choice questions with one correct answer. Each
question carries 1 mark. There is no internal choice in this section.
1 Which one is most reactive towards SN1reaction? 1
a) C H CH(C H )Br
6 5 6 5
b) C H CH(CH )Br
6 5 3
c) C H CH Br
6 5 2
d) C H C(CH )(C H )Br
6 5 3 6 5
2 Which one of the following order is wrong , with respect to the property indicated? 1
a) Aniline>cyclohexylamine>benzamide(basic strength)
b) Formic acid>acetic acid>propanoic acid(acid strength)
c) Benzoic acid>phenol>cyclohexanol(acid strength)
d) Fluoro acetic acid>chloroacetic acid>bromoacetic acid(acid strength)
3 In acidic medium two moles of MnO -accepts how many moles of electrons in a redox 1
4
process?
a) 5 b) 3 c) 10 d) 1

--- Page 34 ---
4 1
For a general reaction A ⎯→ B, the plot of concentration of A vs time is given above. Based on
this graph, order of the reaction,slope of the curve and the unit of rate constant respectively are
a) Zero, -k, molL-1s-1
b) First order , − 𝑘 , s-1
2.303
c) Zero , 1 𝑘, Lmol-1s-1
2
d) First, -k, s-1
5 1
Z in the above reaction sequence is
a) CH CH CH NHCOCH
3 2 2 3
b) CH CH NH
3 2 2
c) CH CH NHCOCH
3 2 3
d) CH CH CONH
3 2 2
6 Propene, CH CH = CH can be converted into 1-propanol by oxidation. Indicate which set of 1
3 2
reagents amongst the following is ideal to effect the above conversion?
a) KMnO (alkaline)
4
b) PCC
c) B H and alk. H O
2 6 2 2
d) O /Zn
3
7 The IUPAC name of [Ni(CO) ]is 1
4
a) Tetracarbonyl nickel(II)
b) Tetracarbonylnickel(0)
c) Tetracarbonylnickelate(I)
d) Tetracarbonylnickel(IV)
8 Which of the following pairs have a branched chain structure? 1
a) Amylopectin, Amylose
b) Amylose, Cellulose
c) Cellulose, Glycogen
d) Amylopectin, Glycogen
9 Which of the following ions has electronic configuration [Ar]3d6 ? 1
a) Ni3+
b) Mn3+
c) Fe3+
d) Co3+ [Atomic numbers: Mn=25;Fe=26;Co=27;Ni=28]

--- Page 35 ---
10 The rate constant for the reaction 2N O ⟶ 4NO + O is 3.10 × 10−5 sec−1 . If the rate is 2.4 × 1
2 5 2 2
10−5mollitre−1 sec−1 then the concentration of N O (in mol litre−1 ) is :
2 5
(a) 0.04
(b) 0.8
(c) 0.07
(d) 1.4
11 The product(s) in the reaction, CH − O − CH(CH ) + HI → Product 1
3 3 2
a) ICH OCH(CH3)
2 2
b) CH OCI(CH )
3 3 2
c) CH I + (CH ) CHOH
3 3 2
d) (d) CH OH + (CH ) CHI
3 3 2
12 When phenol is treated with excess bromine water, it gives: 1
a) 𝑚-bromophenol
b) 2,4-dibromophenol
c) 𝑜 - and 𝑝-bromophenol
d) 2, 4, 6-tribromophenol
Q 13-16 are Assertion – Reason type of questions. Choose answer from following options:
a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
b) Both A and R are true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
c) A is true but R is false.
d) A is false but R is true.
13 Assertion (A):The complex [CrCl (NH ) ] does not give precipitate with AgNO . 1
3 3 3 3
Reason (R):The given compound does not contain counter ions.
14 Assertion (A): Reduction of 1 mol of silver ion requires 2F of charge. 1
Reason (R):1F is equal to charge of 1mol of electron.
15 Assertion : All naturally occurring α-aminoacids except glycine are 1
optically active.
Reason : Most naturally occurring amino acids have L-configuration.
16 Assertion : The enthalpy of reaction remains constant in the presence of a catalyst. 1
Reason : A catalyst participating in the reaction, forms different activated complex and lowers
down the activation energy but the difference in energy of reactant and product remains the
same.
SECTION B
This section contains 5 questions with internal choice in one question. The following
questions are very short answer type and carry 2 marks each.
17 H 2 S, a toxic gas with rotten egg like smell, is used for the qualitative analysis. If the 2
solubility of H S in water at STP is 0.195 m, calculate Henry’s law constant.
2
18 What is lanthanoid contraction? Write it's two consequences. 2
19 Which one of the following will have drastic increase in molar conductivity with decrease in 2
concentration and why? A=Formic acid. B=Hydrochloric acid
OR

--- Page 36 ---
20 Answer any two: 2
a) Why is Grignard reagent prepared in dry ether?
b) What happens when 1-Chloro butane is treated with alcoholic KOH?
c) Chlorobenzene is resistant to nucleophilic substitution reactions. Give reason?
21 What happens when Glucose reacts with a 2
a) mild oxidising agent and
b) strong oxidising agent
OR
Match the following enzyms given in Column I with the reactions they catalyse
given in Column II.
Column I (Enzymes) Column II (Reactions)
(i) Invertase (a) Conversion of glucose into ethyl alcohol
(ii) Maltase (b) Hydrolysis of maltose into glucose
(iii) Pepsin (c) Hydrolysis of cane sugar
(iv) Zymase (d) Hydrolysis of proteins into peptides
SECTION C
This section contains 7 questions with internal choice in one question. The following
questions are short answer type and carry 3 marks each.
22 a) State Kohlrausch law of independent migration of ions. 3
b) Calculate the number of Faradays required to produce 20g of calcium from moltenCaCl .
2
(Atomic mass of calcium=40gmol-1)
c) Write the electrode reaction at the anode and cathode when aqueous copper sulphate
solution is electrolysed in presence of copper electrodes?
23 a) Cr2+ is a good reducing agent. Give reason. 1
b) The potassium dichromate and chromates are interconvertible in aqueous solution 2
depending upon pH of the solution.Explain the colour change with suitable reaction.
24 How can you convert: 1
a) But -2-ene to ethanal? 1
b) Ethyl benzene to benzoic acid 1
c) Chloromethane to ethanoic acid
OR
a) Identify X?
b) Benzoic acid will not give Fridel-Crafts reaction. Give reason.
c) Write chemical equation for the reaction between N-phenyl hydrazene and ethanal?
25 Which moieties of nucleosides are involved in the formation of phosphodiester linkages 3
present in dinucleotides? What does the word diester in the name of linkage indicate? Which
acid is involved in the formation of this linkage?

--- Page 37 ---
26 A compound ‘A’ used in alcoholic beverages on treatment with concentrated sulphuric acid
at 443K produced compound ‘B’, which on oxidation with acidified KMnO gives ethylene
4
glycol. When metallic Sodium is added to compound A, Compound C is formed with
liberation of hydrogen gas. Compound C when treated with methyl chloride produced
compound D.
a) Write the mechanism of the reaction for the conversion of compound A to Compound B. 2
b) Conversion of compound C to compound D is a Named reaction.Identify the reaction. ½
c) Write chemical equation for conversion of C to D ½
27 a) 1
1
b) Write Swarts reaction ?
1
c) Identify A and B in the following:
28a ) Calculate Ecell for the redox reaction taking place in an Electrochemical Cell 2
b) Mg(s) + Cu2+ (0.01M )→ Mg2+ (0.001M)+ Cu(s) ,E0cell = 2.71 V .
c) Write the overall reaction taking place in lead storage battery when the battery is in
use. 1
SECTION D
The following questions are case-based questions. Each question has an
internal choice and carries 4 (2+1+1) marks each. Read the passage carefully and answer
the questions that follow.

--- Page 38 ---
29 Read given passage and answer the questions that follow:
Chemical kinetics deals with rate of chemical reactions, how fast reactants get used up or
how fast products are formed in the reaction. Differed chemical reactions have different
speed. Rate of reaction depends upon concentration of reactants, temperature, pressure
especially in gaseous reactions and presence of catalyst. Chemical reaction takes place as a
result of collision between reacting molecules. The rate of reaction does not depend upon
total number of collisions rather it depends upon number of effective collisions. In a redox
reaction, if E°cell is +ve, ∆G° will be –ve and ‘K’ equilibrium constant will be high i.e.
products formed will be more than the reactants.
The rates of reaction between the reactants A and B were studied starting with different initial
concentrations. The following data were obtained.
[A],mol lit-1 [B],mol lit-1 Initial rate, mol At 320K
lit-1 s-1 at 300K
2.5 x 10-4 3.0x10-5 5.0x 10-4 2.0 x 10-3
5.0x 10-4 6.0x 10-5 4.0x 10-3 ----------
1.0 x10-3 6.0x 10-5 1.6 x 10-2 ………..
a) What is the order of reaction with respect to A and B ?
2
b) Find the rate constant of the reaction at 300K when concentrations are in molL-1 and
1
time in seconds
c) Write the substituted equation to calculate Energy of activation.
1
OR
d) Ea(Activation energy) and ‘A’ (Arrhenius constant) are 104.4 kJ mol–1 and
1
6.0 × 1014 s –1 respectively. What is value of ‘k’ when T → ∞ (1)
30 Sl.no compounds pKb
1 CH NH 3.38
3 2
2 (CH ) NH 3.27
3 2
3 (CH ) N 4.22
3 3
4 C H NH 3.29
2 5 2
5 (C H ) NH 3.0
2 5 2
6 (C H ) N 3.25
2 5 3
7 Aniline 9.38
8 p-nitro aniline 13.0
9 p-Toludine 9.21
Read the table and answer the questions given below.
a) What is the decreasing order of the basicity of CH NH ,(CH ) NHand (CH ) N Mention
3 2 3 2 3 3
the reason. 2
b) Compare the basicity of aromatic and aliphatic amines ?
c) pKb value of ammonia is not mentioned in the above table. Suggest a place in the above table. 1
OR
d) How can you convert ethanamine to methanamine?
1
SECTION E
The following questions are long answer types and carry 5 marks each. All questions have
an internal choice.
31 a) Draw the geometrical isomerism shown by the complex[CoCl (en) ] 1
2 2
b) What is the hybridisation and magnetic nature involved in complex[Ni(CN) ]2- 1
4
2

--- Page 39 ---
c) Write the correct electronic configuration of the central atom in 1
(i) K [Fe(Cl)] ] (ii) [Ni(en) ]Cl based on crystal field theory?
4 6 3 3
d) A coordination compound is red in colour. How can you infer about the CFSE of the complex
OR
a) [Ti(H O) ]3+ is coloured while [Sc(H O) ]3+is colourless.
2 6 2 6
b) [Cr(en) ]3+ is more stable than [Cr(NH ) ]3+
3 3 6
1
c) Arrange the following complex ions in increasing order of CFSE (Δ )
0 1
[CrCl ]3- ,[Cr(CN) ]3-, [Cr(NH ) ]3+
6 6 3 6 1
d) Draw the isomers of [Co(NH ) Cl ]
3 3 3
e) Write the IUPAC name of the ionisation isomer of [Co(NH 3 ) 5 (SO 4 )]Cl 1
1
32 a) Distinguish bet ween the following pair of compounds with a chemical test. 2
(i) Phenol and benzoic acid
(ii) Acetone and pentan-3-one
b) 1
2
c) Write : (i)Cannizzaro reaction. (ii) H-V-Z reaction.
OR 1
a) Acetaldehyde, Acetone, Di-tert-butyl ketone, Methyl tert-butyl ketone
(Increasing order of reactivity towards HCN)
b) An organic compound ‘A’ with molecular formula C H O undergoes acid hydrolysis to
4 8 2
form two compounds B and C .Oxidation of C with acidified KMnO
4
also produces B.
Sodium salt of B on heating with soda lime KMnO
4
also produces B.
i) Identify A,B 1
ii) Out of B and C which will have higher boiling point? Give reason? 1
iii) What is the type of reaction that gives methane as mentioned above. Write it's equation. 2

--- Page 40 ---
33
a) RBC neither swell nor undergo plasmolysis in 0.9% solution of Pure NaCl. Give 1
reason.
b) Which Pure water or salt water of the same volume boils faster? Give reason. 1
c) The temperature at a hill station is -10°C.Will it be suitable to add ethylene 3
glycol(mol.mass 62) to water in the radiator so that the solution is 40% by mass?( K for
f
water =1.86Kkgmol-1)
OR
a) What type of deviation from Raoult’s law is exhibited by a mixture of chloroform and 2
acetone? Will its mixture show any increase or decrease in their boiling point? If yes
Explain.
b) 2g of benzoic acid dissolved in 25g of benzene shows a depression in freezing point 3
equal to 1.62K.Molal depression constant for benzene is 4.9Kkgmol-1.What is the
percentage association of acid if it forms dimer in solution
************************************

--- Page 42 ---
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION (2025-26)
CLASS-XII
SUBJECT: BIOLOGY (044)
Maximum Marks-70 Time Allowed-03 hours
General Instructions:
Read the following instructions carefully and follow them:
i.This Question Paper contains 33 questions. All questions are compulsory
ii.Question paper is divided into five sections -Sections A ,B, C, D and E.
iii.Section A- questions number 1 to 16 are multiple choice type questions .Each questions carries1 mark.
iv.Section B- questions number 17 to 21 are very short answer type questions .Each questions
carries 2 marks.
v.Section C- questions number 22 to 28 are short answer type questions .Each questions carries
3 marks.
vi.Section D- questions number 29 and 30 are Case based questions .Each questions carries 4
marks. Each question has subparts with internal with internal choice in one of the subparts.
vii.Section E- questions number 31 to 33 are Long answer type questions .Each questions carries
5 marks
viii.There is no overall choice. However internal choices have been provided in Section B,C ,D and E
of the question paper .A candidate has to write answer for only one of the alternatives in such
questions.
ix.Wherever necessary, Neat and properly labeled diagrams should be drawn
Section-A
Q. No. 1 to 12 are multiple choice questions. Only one of the choices is correct.
Select and write the correct choice as well as the answer to these questions.
Q. Questions Marks
No.
1 In a population of 1000 individuals360 belongs to genotype AA,480 to Aa and the 1
remaining 160 to aa. Based on this data, the frequency of allele a in the population is
a) 0.4 b) 0.5 c) 0.6 d) 0.7
2 A pink flowered Snapdragon plant was crossed with a red flowered Snapdragon plant. 1
What type of phenotype/s is/are expected in the progeny?
(a) Only red flowered plants
(b) Red flowered as well as pink flowered plants
(c) Only pink flowered plants
(d) Red, Pink as well as white flowered plants
3 In vitro fertilization is a technique that involves transfer of which of the following into the 1
uterus ?
a) Zygote only
b) Embryo only, up to 8 cell stage
c) Embryo with more than 8 blastomere
d) Embryo of 32 cell stage
4 Identify Which of the following are the reason(s) for Rheumatoid arthritis? Choose the 1
correct option.
i. The ability to differentiate pathogens or foreign molecules from self cells increases.
ii. Body attacks self-cells
iii. More antibodies are produced in the body
iv. The ability to differentiate pathogens or foreign molecules from self-cells is lost
(a) i and ii (b) ii and iv (c) iii and iv (d) i and ii
5 Histones are enriched with- 1
(a) Phenylalanine & Leucine (b) Phenylalanine & Arginine
(c) Lysine & Arginine (d) Leucine & Lysine

--- Page 43 ---
6 Pollen grains remain preserved as fossils due to the presence of 1
(a) Tapetum (b) Exine layer (c) Intine layer d) Epidermal layer
7 Which one of the following NOT a male sex accessory duct ? 1
a) Rete testis b) vasa efferentia c) Epidydymis d) seminiferous tubules
8 Identify the part of a bio-reactor which is 1
used as a foam braker from the given
figure.
a) A
b) B
c) C
d) D
9 The particular flavour of swiss cheese is due to a 1
(a) Bacteria (b) Protozoa (c ) Virus (d) Fungi
10 The population growth curve applicable for a population of beetles growing in nature 1
under limited resource conditions available
to them will be
11. Which of the following is not true? 1
a) It is generally believed that competition occurs when closely related species
compete for the same resources that are limiting
b)resources need not be limiting for competition to occur
c ) competition is best defined as a process in which the fitness of one species (measured
in terms of its ‘r’ the intrinsic rate of increase) is significantly lower in the presence of
another species
d) competitive exclusion occurring in nature is always conclusive .

--- Page 44 ---
12. Observe the diagram that represent 1
pyramid of ecological parameter .
It is always true for
a) Pyramid of numbers in a grassland
ecosystem
b) Pyramid of biomass
c) Inverted pyramid of biomass
d) An ideal pyramid of energy
DIRECTIONS For the question 13 to 16, two statements are given - one labelled as Assertion (A) and the
other labelled as Reason ( R). Select the correct answer to these questions from the codes (A), (B),(C) and
(D) as given below.
(A) Both Assertion(A) and Reason(R) are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(B) Both Assertion(A) and Reason(R)are true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(C) Assertion (A) is true but Reason(R) is false.
(D) Assertion (A) is false but Reason(R) is true
13 Assertion: There is no chance of malaria to a man on the bite of female Anopheles 1
mosquito.
Reason: It carries a virulent strain of Plasmodium
14 Assertion (A): Some ethical standards are required to evaluate the morality of scientific
human activities that might help or harm living organisms. 1
Reason (R): Genetic Engineering Approval Committee makes decisions regarding the
validity of Genetically Modified (GM) research and the safety of introducing GM organisms
for public services.
15 Assertion : A biosphere reserve is a specified area.
Reason : No restriction on human activities has been imposed in biosphere reserve 1
16 Assertion A : In gymnosperms the pollen grains are released from the microsporangium
and carried by air currents. 1
Reason R : Air currents carry the pollen grains to the mouth of the archegonia where the
male gametes are discharged and pollen tube is not formed
Section-B
17 Compare and contrast the theories of evolution proposed by Darwin and Hugo De Vries.
18 What are the two major tasks under RCH( Reproductive and Child Health care
programme ) 2
19. During artificial hybridization, it is important to ensure that only desired pollen grains are
used for pollination. How is it ensured?. 2
20. Identify P, Q,,R and S in the diagram of an
antibody molecule given below 2
21. Attempt either option A or B 2
A. Mention the cause and the body system affected by ADA deficiency in humans.
Mention a possible permanent cure for ADA deficient patient.
OR

--- Page 45 ---
BamH1 is a restriction enzyme which recognizes the sequence- 5' - GGATCC - 3'. The
restriction activity of this enzyme is between G and G.
A. Construct the palindrome for the above sequence
B. PBR322 is a plasmid that has a restriction site for this enzyme at the tetracycline
resistant gene. If BamH1 were to be used, how will it impact the response of the
transformant with rDNA to antibiotics ampicillin and tetracycline. Justify.
SECTION-C
22 State the medicinal value and the bioactive molecules produced by Streptococcus, 3
Monascus and Trichoderma
23 a)"Some species in an ecosystem exert greater influence in driving major ecosystem 3
services than others." How did Paul Ehrlich explain this concept in his 'rivet popper
hypothesis'?
OR
(b) (i) How has the introduction of Nile Perch into Lake Victoria in East Africa had a
devastating effect on the indigenous species in the lake?
(ii) Name two invasive weed species which have posed a threat to the existence of our
native species
24 Differentiate between spermatogenesis and oogenesis in humans on the basis of the
following : 3
(a) When the process is initiated.
(b)Number of functional gametes produced per primary spermatocyte /oocyte.
(c) Specific site at which meiosis II is completed
25. (i). Describe the structure and function of a t-RNA molecule. Why is it referred to as an
adapter molecule 3
(ii) Write the changes that hn RNA undergoes before it leaves the nucleus as mRNA.
26. Attempt either option A or B
A. It is often said that the pyramid of energy is always upright. On the other hand, the 3
pyramid of biomass can be both upright and inverted. Explain with the help of
examples and sketches.
OR
B.
((i) Write the parasitic adaptations the parasites have evolved in accordance with their
lifestyles.
(ii) Hosts and parasites tend to co–evolve. Explain
27. Identify ‘a’, ‘b’, ‘c’, ‘d’, ‘e’ and ‘f ’ in the table given below.
3
28. The diagram below refer to PBR322.
3

--- Page 46 ---
a) What do EcoR I ,BamH I represent ?
b) Identify the selectable marker of this pBR322..How does it help in r-DNA
technology ?
c) State the function of “rop”
Section-D
29 The crosses shown in the figure below has been carried out by Morgan in Drosophila to 4
show the phenomenon of linkage and recombination
a) Identify the traits denoted by “y”, “w” and “m”. Also write their contrasting forms.
b)In which of the above two crosses strength of linkage between genes is higher and
why?
c) Why Morgan selected Drosophila for his study? Write any two reasons.
d) Work of Morgan proves deviation of which law of Mendel?
30 Study the diagram showing replication of HIV in humans and answer the following
questions accordingly
4
(a) Write the chemical nature of the coat ‘A’.
(b) Name the enzyme ‘B’ acting on ‘X’ to produce molecule ‘C’. Name ‘C’.
(c) Mention the name of the host cell ‘D’ the HIV attacks first when it enters into the
human body.
d) How does this virus replicate to cause immune -deficiency in the body ?

--- Page 47 ---
Section –E
31. Attempt either option A or B
A) Explain the ovarian and uterine events taking place along with the role of pituitary and
ovarian hormones, during the menstrual cycle in a normal human female under the 5
following phases
i) Follicular/ proliferative phase ii) Luteal/ secretory phase
iii) Menstrual phase
OR
B.
:Given below is the diagram of a
human ovum surrounded by a few
sperms. Observe the diagram
and answer the following questions :
(i) Compare the fate of sperms shown
in the diagram.
(ii) What is the role of zona pellucida
in this process ?
(iii) Analyze the changes occurring in
the ovum during the process.
(iv) How is the entry of sperm into the
ovum facilitated ?
(v) Specify the region of female
reproductive system where the event
represented in the diagram takes
place
32 Attempt either option A or B
The following diagram depicts the process of separation and isolation of DNA
fragments
a) The fragments can be be separated by a technique .What is the technique called ?
b) Without following proper procedure , it is very difficult to isolate the desired
fragments of DNA , write the step sequence wise .
c) State one use of this technique
OR

--- Page 48 ---
B. Answer the following questions based on Bt-crops :
(i) Why do farmers prefer to grow Bt cotton crop than genetically unmodified cotton crops?
(ii) Name any two insects that are killed by Bt toxin.
(iii) Explain the mechanism by which Bt toxin kills the insects but not the bacterium which
possesses the toxin
33 Attempt either option A or B 5
A. (i)Given below is a DNA sequence and the genetic code of a template strand.
Answer the questions based on these, assuming no post-transcriptional or post-
translations modifications will take place. 3’- TACATGCCGTACTGTACC –5’
(a) Write the nucleotide sequence that will be obtained on transcription of this DNA
sequence.
(b) Will translation of this sequence take place? Give a reason to support your answer.
(ii) Give a labelled schematic representation of ‘‘lac operon’’ in its ‘‘Switched Off’’ position
OR
B.
a) Which individual was most probably present at the scene ? Give reason to support
your answer .
b) Explain VNTR and describe its role in DNA fingerprinting.
c) List any two situation where we can use this technique except paternal testing and
crime Scene .
d) Help your friend to identify P,Q,R,S of steps of DNA fingerprint .
(I) Isolation Of DNA (II) Digestion Of DNA By “P” (III)
Separation Of DNA Fragments By “Q” (IV) Transferring (Blotting) Of
Separated DNA Fragments To Synthetic Membranes, Such As Nitrocellulose Or Nylon,
(V) “R” Using Labelled VNTR Probe (VI) “S” Of Hybridized
DNA Fragments By Autoradiography

--- Page 49 ---
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN , BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION (2025-26) SET-1
Class XII
Subject: BIOTECHNOLOGY (045)
Maximum Marks: 70 Maximum Time Allowed: 3 hours
General Instructions:
I. The question paper has five Sections. All questions are compulsory.
II. Section–A contains 12 Multiple choice questions and 4 Assertion-Reasoning
based questions of 1 mark each;
Section–B has 5 short answer questions of 2 marks each;
Section–C has 7 short answer questions of 3 marks each;
Section-D has 2 case-based question of 4 marks;
Section-E has three long answer questions of 5 marks each.
III. There is no overall choice. However, internal choices have been provided
in some questions. A student must attempt only one of the alternatives in
such questions.
SECTION-A (ONE MARK EACH)
1. Which of the following is not a correct statement about monoclonal antibodies? (1)
a. Monoclonal antibodies are highly specific for a particular epitope
b. Monoclonal antibodies are used for the diagnostics and therapeutics
c. Monoclonal antibodies producing Hybridoma cells are fusion of B-Cell and Myeloma cell.
d. In Monoclonal antibody producing hybridoma cells immortality is due to B cells.
2. The relatively high level of auxin to cytokinin favoured ………….. during organogenesis. (1)
a) Root formation b) Shoot formation
c) Both root and shoot formation d) All of the above
3. To reduce the possibility of re-ligation of vector without picking insert, the following method or
methods may be used- (1)
(i) Use of DNA Ligase
(ii) Use of Alkaline Phosphatase
(iii) Use of two different Restriction enzymes for cloning
(iv) Hybridoma technology
Select the correct answer from options below
a. (i), (iv) b. (ii), (iii) c. (iii), (iv) d. (ii), (iv)
4. Alcaligenes eutrophus is associated with the production of (1)
(a) Streptomycin (b) Penicillin
(c) Hepatitis antigen (d) Poly 3-hydroxybutyrate
1
e
g
a
P

--- Page 50 ---
5. A scientist performed an experiment to express Hepatitis B surface antigen in potatoes. (1)
What is the main goal of this strategy ?
a) Increase nutrients content b) Induce immunity
c) Produce insulin d) Induce rapid growth
6. A genetically modified tomato produces less ethylene due to supress of expression of ACS (1)
gene. What is the likely outcome ?
a)Faster ripening b)Reduced sugar content
c) Delayed ripening d) Increased disease resistance
7. A researcher adds a selective medium to culture of soil microbes to favour the growth of (1)
nitrogen-fixing bacteria .Which type of culture is this ?
a) Pure culture b) Enriched culture c) Mixed culture d) Differential culture
8. Which database will you search for Phylogenetic analysis? (1)
a)EMBL b) PDB c) UniProtKB d) PALI
9. A protein ion with a molecular weight of 10,000 Daltons carried a charge of 5+ and was (1)
subjected to mass spectrometric analysis. Calculate its mass to charge ratio.
a) 2001 b) 2000 c) 2501 d) 5001
10. A subtilisin enzyme is engineered to resist denaturation by surfactants in (1)
detergents . What problem does this solve ?
a)Poor solubility in water b)High production cost
c)Loss of enzyme activity d)Inability to remove oil stain
11. Tushita a Biotechnologist synthesized a fluoro-labelled DNA probe by removing few (1)
nucleotides & replacing with labelled one. She also used two enzymes namely-M & N.
Identify the process & enzymes used by her while preparing the probes.
a) Process- Nick translation, M- DNase I, N- DNA Pol I
b) Process- Dideoxy Chain Termination, M- DNase I, N- DNA Pol I
c) Process- Nick translation, M- RNA Pol I, N- DNase I
d) Process- Dideoxy Chain Termination, M- RNA Pol I, N- DNase I
12. Which of the following may be used as a probe for the sequence - (1)
ATTGCGATCGATCGTAGCAGT?
a. CGATCGTAGC b. GCTAGCATCG 2
e
c. GTAGCAGT d. ATTGCGATCG g
a
P

--- Page 51 ---
Question No. 13 to 16 consist of two statements – Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Answer
these questions selecting the appropriate option given below:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true and R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) A is true, but R is false.
(d) A is false, but R is true.
13. Assertion: The specific growth rate of a microorganism is a measure of how quickly its (1)
population increases per unit of biomass under defined conditions.
Reason: Specific growth rate reflects the intrinsic growth capacity of a particular microorganism in
all environments.
14. Assertion- Curd is used as a probiotic which is administered with an antibiotic. (1)
Reason- Curd is a good source of beneficial bacteria that can colonise the intestinal tract
after the use of antibiotics
15. Assertion: Maintaining a stable euploid karyotype is crucial for embryonic stem (ES) (1)
cells in culture.
Reason: Changes in chromosome number or structure can occur spontaneously.
16. Assertion: Virus free plants are regenerated through apical meristem culture. (1)
Reason: Apical meristem cells are devoid of viral infection.
SECTION-B (TWO MARKS EACH)
17. (2)
The figure above depicts a process used in diagnosis of a disease, carefully observe it and answer
the following questions: (2)
a. Write a sequence to show a possible SNP of the given sequence GGTAACTG.
b. Mention any one beneficial SNP variation in the human genome?
18. A fungal extract has anti-cancer potential & it has shown positive result in clinical trials against (2)
3
childhood leukemia . However the active compound is present in very low concentration in the
e
g
extract. Suggest two ways to increase the production of the metabolite by the fungal species. a
P

--- Page 52 ---
19. The gene for a eukaryotic polypeptide hormone was isolated, cloned and over-expressed in a (2)
bacterium. After the polypeptide was purified from the bacterium, it failed to function in the
organism from which the gene was isolated. Suggest all the possibilities why the recombinant
protein was inactive.
20. Calculate the generation time of a bacterial population in which the number of bacteria increases
from 104 /mL to 108/ mL during four hours of exponential growth. (2)
21. Pure-line breeds of a plant are needed to carry out hybridization programme. As a student of (2)
Biotechnology suggest a way to obtain pure-line through Plant Tissue Culture. Explain the process
in brief.
SECTION-C (THREE MARKS EACH)
22. a) Scientists discovered a population of microbes producing certain new antibiotic, in ocean water (3)
samples. Suggest an approach most likely to be used to analysis genome of microbes as a whole
and fish out the gene of interest producing novel molecules.
b) Enlist the steps to be followed for identification of these novel genes
OR
a) Why is Pichia pastoris preferred over Saccharomyces cerevisiae for better expression of
genes ?
b) How would you ensure that production of a recombinant molecule does not occur until
required?
23. The flow chart below depict processes through which genes can give rise to multiple protein (3)
products with differing functions. If A represents Transcription, C- Translation and B&D-Translational
regulation
a) Where among B and D would you find alternative splicing and mRNA editing?
b) Analysis of mRNA does not provide an accurate reflection of the protein content in a
cell. Why? (any two reasons)
24. An investigator is interested in studying the level of mRNA production from every gene in an (3)
eukaryotic organism. Name a technique he would use for completing his research work. &
explain the steps of this technique.
25. a) How is rice genetically engineered to form Golden rice? Why are the seeds of rice yellow in (3)
colour?
b) How has Golden rice been further modified to make it more nutritious?
26. a) What are Restriction enzymes ? Which among them are extensively used in RDT?
b) What is Restriction-Modification system in bacterial cell? Describe it’s both the components.
4
e
g
a
P

--- Page 53 ---
27. Carefully observe the technique of separation of proteins depicted below & answer the questions (3)
. a) Why is this technique called 2-D gel electrophoresis?
b) Proteins M, N, O and P have been separated in B. Arrange these
proteins in increasing order of molecular weight. .
c) Identify A and state the principle involved in A.
28. The figure below represents the production of the first drug to be produced through mammalian
culture. Write down its full name, the condition it cures and its mode of action.
SECTION-D (FOUR MARKS EACH)
29. CASE STUDY – 1
Study the given figure given below and answer the following questions (4) {1+1+2}
5
e
g
a
P

--- Page 54 ---
a) If C has selectable markers- AmpR and lacZ genes and lacZ gene contains MCS, which
selection method will you use to select the recombinant host cells
b) Mention the composition of the medium that you will use for selection.
c) State the principle of this selection method .
30. CASE STUDY – 2 (4) {1+2+1}
Read the following passage and answer the following questions-
Normally the hydroxyl group of a serine residue is not acidic (pKa 12) and this is true for
allother serine residues of chymotrypsin; only ser195 becomes acidic due to the unique
constellation of the three amino acid residues because the protein has folded uniquely in
space. You may be curious about the importance of an acidic serine residue. The
negatively charged oxygen anion is able to make a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl
carbon of the peptide bond of its substrate, loosening it so that a water molecule can
hydrolyse the bond.
6
e
g
P
a

--- Page 55 ---
(i) The hydroxyl group of a Serine residue has a pKa of 12 that is it is not acidic.
Why does serine become acidic chymotrypsin?
(ii) Do you think that the charge relay system will work if Aspartic acid is replaced by
Methionine ? Give reason for your answer.
(iii) How is chymotrypsinogen activated in situ in the duodenum?
Or
Why do organophosphates make enzymes with acidic serine residue inactive?
SECTION-E (FIVE MARKS EACH)
31. In the diagnosis of Tuberculosis, the older methods depended on culturing the causative (5) {1+2+2}
bacillus from sputum. Newer methods include PCR-based assays .
a)What is the principle of PCR-based assay
b)Explain the steps of the process with neat & labelled diagrams.
c)How is PCR-based method more effective than culturing methods ?
OR (5) {1+2+1+1}
a) Write down the structure of dNTP & ddNTP
b) Read autoradiogram given below and deduce the DNA sequence from it.
c) What is the sequence of the original DNA?
d) What is the chain terminator in Sanger’s Method of DNA Sequencing ? Why is it called so?
7
e
g
a
P

--- Page 56 ---
32. A diagnostic company has developed a kit of antibody which can detect Covid-19 antigen in
nasal swabs . (5) {1+2+2}
a)What type of antibody is it ?
b)Explain in detail the process involved in production of this antibody
c)How does it differ from antibodies that naturally present in blood
OR (5) {1+1+1+2}
a. What are Embryonic Stem (ES) cells ?
b. Where from these cells are derived ?
c. How are they maintained in culture?
d. Mention any 2 properties of ES cells.
33. How does V.M Ingram prove that sickle cell anaemia results from an amino acid (5) {3+2}
substitution in Haemoglobin ? Elaborate the process in detail with flow chart.
OR
In the diagram given below : (5) {2+1+2}
a. Identify A, B, C and D
b. Name & explain any one technique that is carried out in part A of the instrument .
c. Calculate the m/z ratio of a polypeptide that has a mass of 20 000 Da and charges +1,
+2, +4, +5.
***************************************************************************************************
8
e
g
a
P

--- Page 57 ---
SET-1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE BOARD EXAMINATION 2025-26
CLASS: XII
SUBJECT: COMPUTER SCIENCE (083)
Maximum Marks: 70 Time allowed: 3 Hours
General Instructions:
● This question paper contains 37 questions.
● All questions are compulsory. However, internal choices have been provided in some
● questions. Attempt only one of the choices in such questions.
● The paper is divided into 5 Sections- A, B, C, D and E.
● Section A consists of 21 questions (1 to 21). Each question carries 1 Mark.
● Section B consists of 7 questions (22 to 28). Each question carries 2 Marks.
● Section C consists of 3 questions (29 to 31). Each question carries 3 Marks.
● Section D consists of 4 questions (32 to 35). Each question carries 4 Marks.
● Section E consists of 2 questions (36 to 37). Each question carries 5 Marks.
● All programming questions are to be answered using Python Language only.
● In-case of MCQ, text of the correct answer should also be written.
Q No. Section-A (21 x 1 = 21 Marks) Marks
1 State if the following statement is True or False: 1
import random
print(random.random()) will generate a floating point as 0.0 <= N <= 1.0
2 What will be the output of the following code? 1
L=[10,20,30,40]
print(L[6: : -2])
3 Consider the given expression: 1
print(25/5 or 2.0+ 20/10)
Which of the following will be the correct output of the given expression?
a) 5 b) 5.0 c) 7.0 d) 4.0
4 In SQL, which type of Join(s) does not contain duplicate column(s)? 1
5 What will be the output of the following Python code? 1
s = "PYTHON"
print(s[-4:1:-1])
a) YTP b) HTYP c) T d) HTY
6 Write the output of the following Python code : 1
for i in range(1,5):
print(i,end=" ")
if i==3:
break
7 What will be the output of the following Python statement: 1
print(10-3**2**2+44/2)
8 Consider the given MySQL Query: 1
SELECT SUBJECT,COUNT(*) from STUDENT group by SUBJECT where
SUBJECT=’PHYISCS’ or SUBJECT=’COMPUTER SC’;
Archita is executing the query but not getting the correct output. Write the
correction.
9 Which is the must execute block in Python program with Exception handing ? 1
a) try b) except c) finally d) all of these
10 What will be the output of the following Python code? 1
d = {True: 'Yes', 1: 'No', 1.0: 'Maybe'}
print(d)
a) {True: 'Yes', 1: 'No', 1.0: 'Maybe'} b) {True: 'Maybe'}
c) {True: 'No'} d) {1: 'Maybe'}

--- Page 58 ---
11 What possible output is expected to be displayed on the screen at the time of 1
execution of the Python program from the following code?
import random
l =[10,20,30,40,50,60,70]
p=random.randint(3,5)
q=random.randint(5,6)
r=p-2
s=q+1
for i in range(r,s):
print(l[i],end="#")
a) 30#40#50#60#70# b) 20#30#40#50#
c) 30#40#50# d) 40#50#60#
12 What will be the output of the following code? 1
a=5
def fn( ):
global a
a=5
print(a, end = “ ”)
fn()
print(a)
a) 5 error b) 5 5 c) error d) None of the above
13 How many Primary Key(s) a table maximum can contain? 1
a) 2 b) Can’t say c) 1 d) As many as no of columns
14 What is the output of the given Python code? 1
s = "a:b:c:d"
result = s.partition(":")
print(result)
a) ('a', ':', 'b:c:d') b) ('a:b', ':', 'c:d')
c) ('a', ':', 'b') d) ('a:b:c', ':', 'd')
15 Yashita made a relation STUDENT of 5 rows and 3 columns, she added 2 rows and 1
added 2 columns later. What will be the Degree of the relation after change?
a) 5 b) 7 c) 8 d)Can’t Say
16 Which SQL command is used to remove a column from a table in MySQL? 1
a) UPDATE b) ALTER c) DROP d) DELETE
17 Subhashree is watching a video on YouTube. Which protocol is primarily responsible 1
for data transmission?
a) FTP b) SMTP c) TCP/IP d) POP3
18 Which statement best describes a gateway? 1
a) It connects devices within the same LAN.
b) It connects two different networks with different protocols.
c) It only forwards packets based on MAC addresses.
d) It functions like a hub in the network.
19 What is designed to store and transport data in a webpage? 1
a) HTML b) DHTML c) FTP d) XML
Q20 and Q21 are Assertion(A) and Reason(R) based questions. Mark the correct
choice as:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation for A
(b) Both A and R are true and R is not the correct explanation for A
(c) A is True but R is False
(d) A is False but R is True
20 Assertion (A): The expression [1, 2, 3, 4].extend(5) in Python will modify the original 1
sequence datatype.
Reason (R): The extend() method adds a LIST to the end of a list and modifies the
list in place.
21 Assertion (A): A foreign key is a non-key attribute of a relation, which is Primary 1
key of another relation.
Reasoning (R): The relation may have more that one foreign key.

--- Page 59 ---
Q No. Section-B ( 7 x 2=14 Marks) Marks
22 A.Explain the difference between explicit and implicit type conversion in Python 2
with a suitable example.
OR
B. Explain the difference between Keyword and Identifier with a suitable example.
23 Sai Harshita, a Python programmer, is working on a project in which she wants to write 2
a function to count the number of even and odd values in the list. She has written the
following code but her code is having errors. Rewrite the correct code and underline
the corrections made.
define EOCOUNT(L):
even_no = odd_no = 0
for i in range(0,len(L))
if L[i]%2=0:
even_no+=1
else:
odd_no+=1
print(even_no, odd_no)
24 A. (Answer using Python built-in methods/functions only): 2
I. Write a statement to change the first letter of the sentence “very good work done “
to capital
II. Write a statement to remove the first occurrence of the element of list L1.
OR
B. Predict the output of the following Python code:
Text=”Python is a funny language”
print( Text.partition(“program”))
print(Text.split("n"))
25 A. Write a function Sorted_data() in Python that accepts a list L . The list L should be 2
sorted in descending order, kept it in a different list and must return the new list.
OR
B. Write a Python function higest_scorer() that accepts a dictionary D1 containing
Name and scores. The function should find the name of the highest scorer of the
student and print it.
26 Predict the output of the Python code given below : 2
fruit = { }
f1= ['Apple', 'Banana', 'apple', 'Banana']
for index in f1 :
if index in fruit:
fruit[index] += 1
else:
fruit[index] = 1
print(fruit)
27 A. Write suitable commands to do the following in MySQL. 2
I. View the list of databases present.
II. use the database “KVS”
OR
B. Differentiate between DDL/DML query in SQL with a suitable example.
28 A. Define the following terms: 2
I. Bridge
II. Gateway
OR
B.
I. Expand the following terms: VoIP and SMTP
II. Differentiate between web server and web browser.
Q No. Section-C ( 3 x 3 = 09 Marks) Marks

--- Page 60 ---
29 A. Write a Python function that count and display the number of three letters words 3
appears in a text file named "File.txt".
OR
B. Write and call a Python function to read lines from a text file STORIES.TXT and
display those lines which starts with a vowel (A, E, I, O, U) irrespective of their case.
30 A list contains following record of a student: 3
[student_name, age, hostel]
Write the following user defined functions to perform given operations on the stack
named ‘stud_details’:
(i) Push_element() - To Push an object containing name and age of students who live
in hostel “Ganga” to the stack
(ii) Pop_element() - To Pop the objects from the stack and display them. Also, display
“Stack Empty” when there are no elements in the stack.
For example:
If the lists of customer details are:
[“Deepesh”,17,”Ganga”]
[“Anish”, 16,”Kaveri”]
[“Dipak”,19,”Yamuna”]
The output should be: [“Deepesh”,17,”Ganga”]
Stack Empty
31 A. Predict the output of the following Python code: 3
str="Fun@Python3.0"
m=""
for i in range(0,int(len(str)/2)):
if(str[i].isupper()):
m=m+str[i].lower()
elif str[i].islower():
m=m+str[i].upper()
else:
if i%2==0:
m=m+str[i-1]
else:
m=m+"#"
print(m)
OR
B. Predict the output of the following Python code:
student = {‘Biswa’: [78, 82, 89], ‘Subhashree: [90, 85, 92], 'Rohan': [67, 73, 70]}
student[‘Subhashree’][1] = 95
student[‘Biswa].append(88)
student['Rohan'] = student['Rohan'][1:]
for name in sorted(student.keys()):
print(name, "=>", student[name])
Q No. Section-D ( 4 x 4 = 16 Marks) Marks
32 Consider the table ORDERS as given below: 4
TABLE- ORDER
O_Id C_Name Product Quantity Price
1001 Jitendra Laptop 1 12000
1002 Mustafa Smartphone 2 10000
1003 Dhwani Headphone 1 1500
1004 Alice Smartphone 1 9000
1005 David Tablet NULL 7000
A) Write the SQL commands :
a. To display the total Quantity for each Product, excluding Products with total
Quantity less than 5.
b. To display the ORDERS table sorted by total price in descending order.
c. To display the distinct customer names from the ORDERS table.
d. To display the sum of the Price of all the orders for which the quantity is NULL
OR

--- Page 61 ---
B) Write the output:
a. SELECT C_Name, SUM(Quantity) AS Total_Quantity FROM ORDERS GROUP
BY C_Name;
b. SELECT * FROM ORDERS WHERE Product LIKE '%phone%';
c. SELECT O_Id, C_Name, Product, Quantity, Price FROM ORDERS WHERE Price
BETWEEN 1500 AND 12000;
d. SELECT MAX(Price) FROM ORDERS;
33 Mr Dipak is the manager of a stationery shop. To maintain daily sales, she created a 4
CSV file Stationery.csv with columns:
Item_ID, Item_Name, Quantity_Sold, and Rate.
Write Python functions to:
i. AddItem() – to accept item details from the user and append them to the
CSV file
ii. TotalEarning() – to calculate and return the total earning from all items.
34 Karunamay is managing a Travel Database and needs to access certain information 4
from the TRANSPORT and JOURNEY tables for an upcoming tourism survey. Help
him extract the required information by writing the appropriate SQL queries as per
the tasks mentioned below:
Table: TRANSPORT
CODE VTYPE PERKM
101 VOLVO BUS 160
102 AC DELUXE BUS 150
103 ORIDINARY BUS 90
104 CAR 20
105 SUV 40
Table: JOURNEY
No NAME TDATE KM CODE NOP
101 Janish Kin 2015-11-13 200 101 32
103 Vedika Sahai 2016-04-21 100 103 45
105 Tarun Ram 2016-03-23 350 102 42
102 John Fen 2016-02-13 90 102 40
107 Ahmed Khan 2015-01-10 75 104 02
104 Raveena 2016-05-28 80 105 04
a. To display NO, NAME, TDATE from the table TRANSPORT in descending order of
NO.
b. To display the NAME of all the travellers from the table TRANSPORT who are
travelling by vehicle with code 101 or 102.
c. To display the NO and NAME of those travellers from the table TRANSPORT who
travelled between ‘2015-12-31’ and ‘2015-04-01’.
d. i)To display all the details from table TRANSPORT for the travellers, who have
travelled distance more than 100 KM in ascending order of NOP?
OR
ii) To display the Cartesian Product of the two tables.
35 Omm Subham wants to write a program in Python to insert the following record in the 4
table named Bank_Account in MySQL database, Bank :
· Accno – integer
· Cname – string
· Atype – string
· Amount – float
Note the following to establish connectivity between Python and MySQL : ·
Username – admin · Password – root · Host – localhost
The values of fields Accno, Cname, Atype and Amount have to be accepted from the
user. Help Omm Subham to write the program in Python.

--- Page 62 ---
Q No. Section-E ( 3 x 5 = 15 Marks) Marks
36 Mr Biswa, a hospital administrator, wants to maintain patients’ details in a binary file 2+3
PATIENT.DAT. Each record includes:
Patient_ID, Name, Age, and Disease.
Write Python functions to:
AddPatient() – to input patient details and append them to the binary file
PATIENT.DAT.
SearchPatient() – to display details of the patient whose Disease is "Fever"
37 Ankita Industries has set up its new center at Bhubaneswar for its office and web- 5
based activities. The company compound has 4 buildings as shown in the diagram
below:
As a Network Expert, need to suggest the best network-related solutions for them to
resolve the issues/problems mentioned in questions (i) to (v), keeping the following
parameters in mind :
ANKITA INDUSTRIES
BHUBANESWAR CAMPUS
JAGANNATH BLOCK BALABHADRA BLOCK
SUBHADRA BLOCK SUDARSHAN BLOCK
BLOCK TO BLOCK DISTANCES (IN METERS)
FROM TO DISTANCE
JAGANNATH BLOCK BALABHADRA BLOCK 34
JAGANNATH BLOCK SUDARSHAN BLOCK 105
JAGANNATH BLOCK SUBHADRA BLOCK 125
BALABHADRA BLOCK SUBHADRA BLOCK 67
BALABHADRA BLOCK SUDARSHAN BLOCK 56
SUDARSHAN BLOCK SUBHADRA BLOCK 110
Number of Computers in each block is as follows:
JAGANNATH BLOCK 26
BALABHADRA BLOCK 150
SUBHADRA BLOCK 17
SUDARSHAN BLOCK 27
(i) Suggest a cable layout of connections between the Blocks.
(ii) Suggest the most suitable place (i.e. block) to house the server of this
organization with a suitable reason.
(iii) Suggest the placement of the following devices with appropriate reasons:
a. Hub / Switch
b. Repeater
(iv) The organization is planning to link its sale counter situated LEH. Which technology
of internet will be connected without compromising good speed.
(v) (a) Suggest a device/software to be installed in the Campus to take care of data
security.
OR
(b) What type of network (PAN, LAN, MAN, or WAN) will be set up among the
computers connected in above mentioned diagram?
ALL THE BEST

--- Page 63 ---
SET-1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION 2025-26
CLASS XII
SUBJECT - INFORMATICS PRACTICES (065)
TIME: 3 HOURS M.M.70
General Instructions:
• Please check this question paper contains 37 questions.
• All questions are compulsory.
• The paper is divided into 5 Sections- A, B, C, D and E.
• Section A consists of 21 questions (1 to 21). Each question carries 1 Mark.
• Section B consists of 7 questions (22 to 28). Each question carries 2 Marks.
• Section C consists of 4 questions (29 to 32). Each question carries 3 Marks.
• Section D consists of 2 case study type questions (33 to 34). Each question carries 4
Marks.
• Section E consists of 3 questions (35 to 37). Each question carries 5 Marks.
• All programming questions are to be answered using Python Language only.
• In case of MCQ, text of the correct answer should also be written.
SECTION A (21x1=21 Marks)
Section A consists of 21 questions (1 to 21).
Each question carries 1 Mark.
QUESTION MARKS
1 State Whether the following statement is True or False: 1
The rename( ) always makes changes in the default dataframe.
2 What will be the result of the following SQL Query? 1
SELECT ROUND(3.12564,2);
A. 3.13
B. 3.12
C. 3.00
D. 4.00
3 Ramesh was unable to understand how the recruiters were able to know about 1
his digital activity when he had not shared anything with them. The recruiters
might have checked.
A. Carbon Footprint
B. Water Footprint
C. Online print of Rama.
D. Digital Footprint
4 Which of the following Python statement is used to read data from a CSV file 1
to a DataFrame
A. pandas.csvread()
B. pandas.read_csv()
C. pandas.csv_read()
D. pandas.readcsv()
5 The device used to connect two networks using different protocols is: 1
A. Router
B. Repeater
C. Gateway
D. Hub
6 What is the position of "SQL" in following Query: 1
SELECT INSTR('Learn SQL Programming', 'SQL');
A. 9
B. 8
C. 7
D. 6
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 64 ---
7 After practical, Soumya left the computer laboratory but forgot to sign off from 1
her email account. Later, her classmate Ravindra started using the same
computer. He is now logged in as Soumya. He sends inflammatory email
messages to few of his classmates using Soumya’s email account. Ravindra’s
activity is an example of which of the following cyber crime?
A. Hacking
B. Identity theft
C. Cyber bullying
D. Plagiarism
8 Which of the following best describes the index in a Pandas Series? 1
A. A row number in a table
B. A name given to the Series
C. A data label associated with each value in the Series
D. The length of the Series
9 A relation contains 4 rows and 3 columns. What is the degree and cardinality 1
of the relation?
A. Both are 4
B. Both are 3
C. 4 and 3 Respectively
D. 3 and 4 Respectively
10 Which protocol allow us to have voice calls over the internet? 1
A. HTTP
B. VoIP
C. Video Chat
D. SMTP
11 What is the difference between COUNT (DISTINCT column) and 1
COUNT(column)?
A. COUNT (DISTINCT column) counts only unique values, while
COUNT(column) counts all non-NULL values
B. COUNT (DISTINCT column) counts all values including NULL, while
COUNT(column) counts only unique values
C. They are exactly the same
D. COUNT (DISTINCT column) always returns a lower count than
COUNT(column)
12 Which of the following command is used to display the last three elements 1
of a series, ‘S’ ?
A. S.Tail
B. S.tail( )
C. S.tail(3)
D. S.Tail(3)
13 What is the name of the IT Law that India is having in the Indian Legislature? 1
A. India’s Technology (IT) Act 2000
B. India’s Digital information Technology (DIT) Act ,2000
C. The Information Technology Act ,2000
D. The Technology Act ,2008
14 What is the correct order of clauses in a SQL query that includes GROUP 1
BY?
A. SELECT, GROUP BY, FROM, WHERE
B. SELECT, FROM, WHERE, GROUP BY
C. SELECT, FROM, GROUP BY, WHERE
D. FROM, SELECT, WHERE, GROUP BY
15 What will be the output of pd.DataFrame([10, 20, 30])? 1
A. A DataFrame with one column and three rows
B. A DataFrame with three columns and one row
C. An error
D. A Series
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 65 ---
16 Bluetooth devices such as wireless headsets typically form which type of 1
network?
A. PAN
B. LAN
C. WAN
D. MAN
17 Which of the following is a correct query with respect to the relation 1
book(book_name, price).
A. UPDATE book SET price AS 50;
B. UPDATE TABLE book SET price = 10;
C. UPDATE book SET price = 10;
D. All are incorrect
18 Give the output of the following code: 1
import pandas as pd
df = pd.DataFrame({'A': [11, 12], 'B': [23, 24]})
print(df.shape)
A. (2, 2)
B. (2, 1)
C. (1, 2)
D. (4,)
19 What will happen if we use ORDER BY with a column that contains NULL
values?
A. NULL values will be sorted first
B. NULL values will be sorted last
C. NULL values will cause an error
D. NULL values will be excluded from the result
Q20 and 21 are ASSERTION(A) AND REASONING (R) based questions. Mark the correct
choice as :
a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation for A
b) Both A and R are true and R is not the correct explanation for A
c) A is True but R is False
d) A is false but R is True
20 Assertion (A): A list of dictionaries can be passed to form a DataFrame. 1
Reason (R): Keys of the dictionary are taken as row names by default.
21 Assertion (A): The BETWEEN operator includes both boundary values. 1
Reason (R): BETWEEN 10 AND 20 includes 10 and 20 in the result.
SECTION B (7x2=14 Marks)
Section B consists of 7 questions (22 to 28).
Each question carries 2 Marks
22 A) What are the key features of a Pandas Series? 2
OR
B) Can the data type in a Series be mixed? Explain briefly
23 What is a web browser? Name any two commonly used browsers. 2
24 Write python code to create the Series EMP with following data (using List) 2
E1 Sanya
E2 Krish
E3 Rishav
E4 Deepak
dtype: object
25 A) List any two health hazards related to excessive use of Technology. 2
OR
B) What measures can you take to curb online frauds?
26 Write SQL query to perform the following: 2
i. Display the full month name of ‘’2025-05-12”
ii. Show the first 3 characters of the string “Digital India”
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 66 ---
27 Explain how a digital footprint can affect a person’s privacy and professional 2
reputation. Give one example.
28 A) Write the output of the following Code: 2
import pandas as pd
data ={'a':0,'b':1.,'c':2.}
s =pd.Series(data,index=['b','c','d','a'])
print(s)
OR
B) Give the output for the following code.
import pandas as pd
data = [{'a': 1, 'b': 2},{'a': 5, 'b': 10, 'c': 20}]
df1 = pd.DataFrame(data, index=['first', 'second'], columns=['a', 'b1'])
print(df1)
SECTION C (4x3=12)
Section C consists of 4 questions (29 to 32).
Each question carries 3 Marks.
29 Smita, recently started using her social media account. Within a few days, she 3
becomes friends with many people she knows and some that she does not know.
After some time, she starts getting negative comments on her posts. She also finds
that her pictures are being shared online without her permission.
Based on the given information, answer the questions given below.
i. Identify the type of cybercrime she is a victim of.
ii. Under which act, she can lodge a complaint with relevant authorities?
iii. Suggest any two precautionary measures which she should take in future
while being online to avoid any such situations.
30 A) Consider the following DataFrame “INFO” 3
City Hospitals
0 Delhi 189
1 Mumbai 208
2 Kolkata 149
3 Chennai 157
Write python pandas code to create the above dataframe using List of Dictionary
OR
B) Consider the following Series S1 having
COUNTRY GDP
INDIA 9
CHINA 10
JAPAN 8
SRILANKA 5
PAKISTAN 3
NEPAL 7
Write python pandas code to create the above Series using ndarray.
31 i. Write an SQL statement to create a table named STUDENT, with the 2+1
following specifications:
Column Name Data Type Key
Admnno Char(6) Primary Key
Name Varchar(30)
DOB Date
Admndate Date
Mark Integer(3)
ii. Write SQL Query to insert the following data in the Employee Table
001221, Ramesh Chouhan, 2011/06/19, 2019/05/25, 435
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 67 ---
32 A. Consider the following Relations: 3
Table: LOAN
Loan_Number Branch_name Amount
L-170 Bhubaneshwar 30000
L-230 Cuttack 40000
L-650 Puri 55000
L-150 Bhubaneshwar 28000
L-450 Cuttack 45000
Table: BORROWER
Customer_ID Customer_Name Loan_number
C001 Sambit L-170
C002 Rahul L-650
C003 Smita L-150
C004 Abhishek L-450
C005 Barun L-230
Write appropriate SQL queries for the following:
i. Display Branch Name wise Total amount
ii. List all branch name in the decreasing order of Amount
iii. Display Loan number along with Customer ID and customer name
OR
B. Consider the following Relations:
Table : Book
Book_id Book_name Author_name Publisher Price Type Quantity
C0001 Fast Cook Lata Kapoor EPB 355 Cookery 5
F0001 The Tears William Hopkins First Publi. 650 Fiction 20
T0001 My First c++ Brain & Brooke FPB 350 Text 10
T0002 C++ Brain works Lata Kapoor TDH 355 Text 15
F0002 Fast Cook Anna Roberts First Publ. 750 Fiction 20
Write appropriate SQL queries for the following:
i. Which Attribute in the table can be considered as Primary Key and Why?
ii. Write a suitable SQL query to rename the column Type as Book_Type
iii. Write SQL Query to display publisher wise number of book published
SECTION D (2x4=8)
Section D consists of 2 case study type questions (33 to 34).
Each question carries 4 Marks.
33 During a practical, a student Rajesh has to fill in the blanks in a Python program 4
that generates a bar chart. This bar chart represents the Number and its half as
follows.
SL NO Number Half
1 10 5
2 20 10
3 30 15
4 40 20
5 50 25
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 68 ---
Help Rajesh to complete the code:
import _________________ as plt #Statement-1
import numpy as np
x=np.array([1,2,3,4,5])
y=np.array([10,20,30,40,50])
z=np.array([5,10,15,20,25])
plt.bar(x,y,width=0.3, label='Number')
______________________________ #Statement-2
plt.xlabel("SL NO")
plt.ylabel("Value")
___________________ #Statement-3
___________________ #Statement-4
plt.show()
i. Write suitable code in statement-1 to import the library.
ii. Refers to the graph above, fill the blank of statement 2 to draw bar
graph for Half
iii. Fill in the blank statement-3 to display lagend in the graph
iv. Fill in the blank in statement-4 with the appropriate Python code to
save the graph as an image file named number.png
34 A. Write SQL query with reference to the table: SPORTS 4
GID NAME DATEOFGAME WINNER PRIZEMONEY
101 JUDO 2022-10-17 RAGHAV 17000
102 BADMINTON 2022-05-18 KIRAN 14000
103 JUDO 2022-08-18 KAMAL 19000
104 TAEKWONDO 2021-07-20 AHMED 14000
105 CHESS 2021-05-06 AKHIL 17000
i) Display Sports name in lower case.
ii) Display Winner along with the name of the Month of Date of Game
when it held.
iii) Display Average of Prize Money.
iv) Display sports name and winner having winner name start with ‘K’ and
prize money more than 15000.
OR
B. Write output of the following SQL queries with reference to the Table:
RESULT
SLNO NAME STIPEND SUBJECT AVERAGE DIV.
11 KARAN 400 PHYSICS 68.47 I
12 DIWAKAR 450 COMP. Sc. 68.52 I
13 DIVYA 300 CHEMISTRY 40.23 III
14 REKHA 350 PHYSICS 63.75 I
15 ARJUN 500 MATHS 70.47 I
16 SABINA 400 CEHMISTRY 55.25 II
17 JOHN 250 PHYSICS 64.72 I
18 ROBERT 450 MATHS 38.87 III
19 RUBINA 500 COMP. Sc. 62.98 I
20 VIKAS 400 MATHS 57.94 II
i) Select MIN(AVERAGE) from RESULT where SUBJECT=”MATHS”;
ii) Select RIGHT(NAME,3) from RESULT where STIPEND>395;
iii) Select LOWER(NAME),SUBJECT from RESULT where AVERAGE
between 50 and 60;
iv) Select SUBJECT, ROUND(AVERAGE,1) from RESULT where
STIPEND > 430;
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 69 ---
SECTION E (3x5=15)
Section E consists of 3 questions (35 to 37).
Each question carries 5 Marks.
35 XYZ Ltd is setting up a secured network for office campus at Gurgaon for day-to- 5
day office and web-based activities. The Company planning to have connectivity
between three buildings and the head office situated in Mumbai.
Answer the questions (i) to (v) after going through the building positions in
the campus and other details, which are given below:
Distance between various building Number of Computers:
are as follows: GREEN Building 32
Building GREEN to 110 Mts BLUE Building 45
Building RED RED Building 150
Building GREEN to 45 Mts Head Office 10
Building BLUE
Building BLUE to 65 Mts
Building RED
Gurgaon Campus to 1760 KM
Head Office
As a network expert, provide the best possible answer for the followings:
i. Suggest a cable layout of connections between the buildings at
Gurgaon.
ii. Suggest the most suitable place (i.e. buildings) to house the server of
this organization and why?
iii. Suggest the placement of the following device with justification:
a. Repeater
b. Hub/Switch
iv. Suggest a system (hardware/software) to prevent unauthorized access
to or from the network.
v. What type of Network out of LAN, MAN, WAN formed to connect Mumbai
Head Office and Gurgaon ?
36 Consider the following DataFrame DF. 5
Eng Maths Science
Priya 80 88 73
Ramya 70 98 81
Kavita 75 77 66
Kanishka 86 96 94
Harshini 90 95 92
Write Python statement for the following task:
i. Add a new column Total by adding Eng, Maths and Science mark.
ii. Print the First 3 rows of the DataFrame.
iii. Rename the column Eng to “Ënglish”
iv. Delete the column Maths from the DataFrame
v. Display details who secured more than 90 mark in Math
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 70 ---
37 A. Write Suitable SQL query for the following: 5
i. To display the minimum score from the SCORE column (attribute) in the
STUDENT table
ii. To display the position of sub string ‘AR’ in the LASTNAME column
(attribute) in the EMPLOYEE table.
iii. To display the data from the column (attribute) LOCATION in the
ADDRESS table, after eliminating any leading and trailing spaces.
iv. To display the Cardinality of SALARY table.
v. To display Month of the date of birth from the DOB column in the
CUSTOMER table
OR
B. Write Suitable SQL query for the following:
i. To Display first 5 characters from the string ‘KVS Regional Office
Bhubaneshwar’
ii. To display position of first occurrence of ‘or’ in the string ‘Corporate’
iii. Calculate and display remainder when 265 is divided by 32.
iv. To display Maximum and Minimun Salary from the SALARY column in
the STAFF Table.
v. Display Year from the date ‘2025-05-29’
****************************
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 71 ---
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE -BOARD EXAMINATION (2025-26)
CLASS: XII
SUBJECT: ACCOUNTANCY (055)
Set-1
Maximum Marks 80 Maximum Time: 3 Hours
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:
1. This question paper contains 34 questions. All questions are compulsory.
2. Paper is divided into two parts, Part A and B.
3. Question 1 to 16 and 27 to 30 carries 1 mark each.
4. Question 17 to 20, 31 and 32 carries 3 marks each.
5. Question 21,22 and 33 carries 4 marks each.
6. Questions from 23 to 26 and 34 carries 6 marks each.
Part – A
Accounting for Partnership Firms and Companies
Q QUESTIONS M
No
1 According to Profit and Loss Account, the net profit for the year is ₹.15,000. Partners’ 1
capital of A & B are ₹1,80,000 and ₹1,20,000 respectively. interest on partner ‘s capital
is 10% p.a. The interest payable to partners as per Profit and Loss Appropriation
Account will be:
a). A-9,000, B-6,000 b). A-18,000, B-12,000
c). A-7,500, B-7,500 d). None of the above
2 Arun and Vijay are partners in a firm sharing profits and losses in the ratio of 5:1. 1
Balance Sheet (an Extract)
Liabilities (₹) Assets (₹)
Machinery 40,000
If machinery in balance sheet is overvalued by 1/3rd, find out the value of machinery to
be shown in the new balance sheet?
a) ₹.44,000 b) ₹.48,000
c) ₹. 32,000 d) ₹.30,000
3 Calculate value of goodwill at 3 year’s purchase of super profit, when capital employed 1
is ₹.2,50,000, average profit ₹ 30,000 and normal rate of return is 10%?
a) ₹ 3,000 b) ₹ 25,000 c) ₹ 30,000 d) ₹ 15,000
4 A and S were partners with capitals of ₹.3,00,000 and ₹.2,00,000 respectively. B was 1
admitted as a new partner for 1/4th share of profits. B brought ₹.1,20,000 for his share
of goodwill and ₹.2,40,000 for capital. The amount of goodwill premium credited to A
will be:
a) ₹ 40,000 b) ₹ 30,000
c) ₹ 72,000 d) ₹ 60,000
5 Anuradha Ltd. issued 2,00,000, 7% debentures of ₹100 each at a discount of 5%, 1
redeemable at a premium of 5%. On issue of debentures, ‘Loss on Issue of Debentures
Account’ will be:
(a) Credited by ₹10,00,000 (b) Debited by ₹10,00,000
(c) Debited by ₹20,00,000 (d) Credited by ₹20,00,000

--- Page 72 ---
6 X, Y and Z are partners sharing profits in 3:2:1. Z was guaranteed a minimum profit of 1
₹.60,000. Any deficiency arising out of this will be borne by X and Y in the ratio of 2:1.
Profit for the year ended 31.03.2025 amounted to ₹.2,70,000. How much deficiency will
be borne by X?
a) ₹.10,000 b) ₹.15,000 c) ₹.5,000 d) ₹.20,000
7 Angle and Circle were partners in a firm. Their Balance Sheet showed: 1
Furniture ₹.2,00,000; Stock ₹.1,40,000; Debtors ₹.1,62,000; Creditors ₹.60,000.
Square was admitted and new profit-sharing ratio was agreed at 2:3:5.
Stock was revalued at ₹.1,00,000; Creditors of ₹.15,000 are not likely to be claimed;
Debtors of ₹.2,000 have become irrecoverable and Provision for doubtful debts to be
provided @10%. Angle’s share in loss on revaluation amounted to ₹30,000. Revalued
value of Furniture will be:
(a) ₹.2,17,000 (b) ₹.1,03,000 (c) ₹.3,03,000 (d) ₹.1,83,000
(OR)
In case of admission of a partner, match the following:
(i) Increase in value of Building (A) debited to Revaluation A/c
(ii) Existing Goodwill (B) credited to Revaluation A/c
(iii) Accumulated profits (C) credited to Old Partners’ Capital A/cs
(iv) Decrease in value of Furniture (D) debited to Old Partners’ Capital A/cs
Choose the correct option:
(a) (i)-(B), (ii)-(C), (iii)-(D), (iv)-(A)
(b) (i)-(B), (ii)-(D), (iii)-(C), (iv)-(A)
(c) (i)-(B), (ii)-(A), (iii)-(C), (iv)-(D)
(d) (i)-(A), (ii)-(B), (iii)-(D), (iv)-(C)
8 X and Y share profits in the ratio of 3:2. Z was admitted as a partner who gets 1/5 share.
Z acquires 3/20 from X and 1/20 from Y. The new profit sharing ratio will be : 1
(a) 9 : 7 : 4 (b) 8 : 8 : 4 (c) 6 : 10 : 4 (d) 10 : 6 :4
9 A, B and C are partners, their deed provides for interest on drawings @ 8% p.a. 1
B withdrew a fixed amount in the middle of every month and his interest on drawing
amounted to ₹4,800 at the end of the year. What was the amount of his monthly
drawings?
a) ₹ 10,000 b) ₹ 5,000 c) ₹ 1,20,000 d) ₹ 48,000
10 Sujata Ltd. issued 5,000, 7% Debentures of ₹100 each at a premium of 10%. According 1
to the terms of issue, 40% of the amount was payable on application and the balance
on allotment. The issue was fully subscribed and all amounts were duly received. The
amounts received on application and allotment respectively were:
(a) ₹2,50,000 and ₹3,00,000 (b) ₹2,00,000 and ₹3,00,000
(c) ₹2,00,000 and ₹3,50,000 (d) ₹2,00,000 and ₹2,50,000
11 ………………………………….is a unique type of debt that does not make periodic 1
interest payments to its holders
(a) Equity Share (b) Debenture (c) Bond (d) Preference share

--- Page 73 ---
12 Saurabh, Shirin and Somesh are partners in a firm sharing profits and losses in the 1
ratio of 3:2:1. Somesh retires and the new profit sharing ratio between Saurabh and
Shirin is 3:2. The gaining ratio between Saurabh and Shirin will be:
(a) 3:2 (b) 3:1 (c) 1:1 (d) 2:1
OR
Khushi, Namita and Manvi were partners in a firm sharing profits and losses in the ratio
of 5:2:3. On 30th June, 2022, Khushi died. The partnership deed provided that on the
death of a partner, her share of profit till the date of death was to be calculated on the
basis of average profit of last three years less ₹10,000.
Profits for the last three years were:
Year ended 31st March, 2020: ₹1,20,000
Year ended 31st March, 2021: (₹50,000)
Year ended 31st March, 2022: ₹1,70,000
Khushi’s share of profit till the date of her death was:
(a) ₹35,000 (b) ₹9,583 (c) ₹28,750 (d) ₹8,750
13 Realisation expenses of ₹.15,000 were paid by firm on behalf of Vikas, a partner. 1
Which of the following journal entry will be passed?
(a) Realisation A/c Dr. ₹15,000 To Cash/Bank A/c ₹15,000
(b) Realisation A/c Dr. ₹15,000 To Vikas’s Capital A/c ₹15,000
(c) Vikas’s Capital A/c Dr. ₹15,000 To Cash/Bank A/c ₹15,000
(d) None of these
14 A company forfeited 6,000 shares of ₹10 each, on which only application money of ₹3 1
has been paid. 4,000 of these shares were re-issued at ₹12 per share as fully paid up.
Amount of capital reserve will be:
(A) ₹18,000 (B) ₹12,000 (C) ₹30,000 (D) ₹24,000
15 On dissolution of a partnership firm, furniture appearing in the Balance Sheet was 1
₹2,00,000. 50% of the furniture was taken over by a partner at ₹65,000 and balance
50% was sold at 20% less than the book value. The amount debited to bank account
was:
(a) ₹1,45,000 (b) ₹80,000 (c) ₹65,000 (d) ₹1,85,000
16 Premier Auto Ltd. purchased assets of the value of ₹.3,60,000 from Anand Ltd. and 1
made the payment of purchase consideration by issuing 11% Debentures of ₹.100 each
at a discount of 10%. The number of debentures issued by Premier Auto Ltd. were:
(a) 3,600 (b) 36,000 (c) 40,000 (d) 4,000
17 L, M and N are partners sharing profits and losses in the ratio of 4:3:2. They decide to 3
share future profits and losses in the ratio of 2:3:4 with effect from 1st April, 2017. An
extract of their Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2017 is:
Liabilities ₹. Assets ₹.
Investments Fluctuation Reserve 9 , 0 0 0 Investments (At cost) 1,00,000
Show the accounting treatment under the following alternative cases:
(i) If the market value of investments is ₹.95,500.
(ii) If the market value of investments is ₹.1,09,000.
(iii) If the market value of investments is ₹.73,000.

--- Page 74 ---
18 Youth Ltd. took a loan of ₹.15,00,000 from State Bank of India against the security of 3
tangible assets. In addition to principal security, it issued 10,000, 11% debentures of
₹.100 each as collateral security. Pass necessary journal entries for the above
transactions, if the company decided to record the issue of 11% debentures
as collateral security and show the presentation in the Balance Sheet of Youth Ltd?
19 Rohit and Mohit were partners in a firm sharing profits and losses in the ratio of 3:2. 3
Rahul was admitted into partnership for 1/3 share in profits. Goodwill of the firm was
valued at ₹.30,000. Rahul brought ₹.40,000 as capital and ₹.5,000 out of his share of
goodwill premium in cash. At the time of Rahul’s admission, goodwill was appearing in
the books of the firm at ₹.15,000.
Pass necessary journal entries for the above transactions in the books of the firm on
Rahul’s admission?
(OR)
Sterling Enterprises is a partnership business with Ryan, Williams and Sania as
partners engaged in production and sales of electrical items and equipment.
Their capital contributions were ₹.50,00,000, ₹.50,00,000 and ₹.80,00,000 respectively
with the profit-sharing ratio of 5:5:8. As they are now looking forward to expand their
business, it was decided that they would bring in sufficient cash to double their
respective capitals. This was duly followed by Ryan and Williams but due to
unavoidable reasons, Sania could not do so and ultimately it was agreed that to bridge
the shortfall in the required capital, a new partner should be admitted who would bring
in the amount that Sania could not bring and that the new partner would get a share of
profits equal to half of Sania’s share which would be sacrificed by Sania only.
Consequent to this agreement, Ejaz was admitted and he brought in the required capital
and ₹.30,00,000 as premium for goodwill.
Questions:
(i) What will be the new profit-sharing ratio of Ryan, Williams, Sania and Ejaz?
(a) 1:1:1:1 (b) 5:5:8:8
(c) 5:5:4:4 (d) None of the above
(ii) What is the amount of capital brought in by the new partner Ejaz?
(a) ₹.50,00,000 (b) ₹.80,00,000
(c) ₹.40,00,000 (d) ₹.30,00,000
(iii) What is the value of the goodwill of the firm?
(a) ₹.1,35,00,000 (b) ₹.30,00,000
(c) ₹.1,50,00,000 (d) Cannot be determined from the given data
20 Elina, Ferry and Gauri were partners in a firm sharing profits in the ratio of 2:2:1. On 3
30th September, 2021, their firm was dissolved. On the date of dissolution, the Balance
Sheet of the firm was as follows:
Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2021
Liabilities ₹ Assets ₹
Capital Accounts Gauri’s Capital Account 500
Elina 1,30,000 Profit and Loss Account 10,000
Ferry 1,00,000 Land and Building 1,00,000
Creditors 45,000 Furniture 50,000
Outstanding Expenses 17,000 Machinery 90,000
Debtor 36,500
Bank 5,000
-------------- -----------
2,92,000 2,92,000

--- Page 75 ---
The firm was dissolved on the following terms:
Ferry was appointed to undertake the process of dissolution for which he was allowed
a remuneration of ₹.5,000. Ferry agreed to bear the dissolution expenses.
The land and building was sold through a property dealer at a price of 110% of the book
value. A commission of 1% on the selling price of land and building was paid to the
property dealer.
Creditors were payable on an average of 3 months from the date of dissolution. On
discharging the creditors on the date of dissolution, they were allowed a discount of
5%. On the basis of the above information, you are to suggest the answers of the
following questions:
(i) What will be the amount realised from the land and building?
(ii) What amount will be payable to the creditors?
(iii) What will be the treatment of the dissolution expenses?
21 Rohit, Raman and Raina are partners in a firm. Their capital accounts on 1st April, 2019, 4
stood at ₹.2,00,000, ₹.1,20,000 and ₹.1,60,000 respectively. Each partner withdrew
₹.15,000 during the financial year 2019-20. As per the provisions of their partnership
deed:
(a) Interest on capital was to be allowed @ 5% per annum.
(b) Interest on drawings was to be charged @ 4% per annum.
(c) Profits and losses were to be shared in the ratio 5:4:1.
The net profit of ₹.72,000 for the year ended 31st March, 2020, was divided equally
amongst the partners without providing for the terms of the deed.
You are required to pass a single adjustment entry to rectify the error (Show your
workings clearly).
22 Atishyokti Ltd. was registered with an authorised capital of ₹.20,00,000 divided into 4
2,00,000 Equity Shares of ₹10 each, payable ₹.3 on application, ₹.6 on allotment
(including ₹.1 premium) and balance on call.
The company offered 80,000 shares for public subscription. All the money has been
duly called and received except allotment and call money on 5,000 shares held by
Manish and call money on 4,000 shares held by Alok. Manish’s shares were forfeited
and out of these 3,000 shares were re-issued at ₹.9 per share as fully paid up.
Show share capital in the books of the company. Also prepare notes to accounts.
23 Prakash, Aakash and Vikash were partners sharing profits in 2:2:1. Their Balance Sheet 6
was as follows:
Balance sheet
As on 31st March, 2022
Liabilities (₹) Assets (₹)
Creditors 2,00,000 Bank 40,000
General Reserve. 1,00,000 Stock 60,000
Capitals: Prakash 1,20,000 Debtors 1,60,000
Aakash 2,00,000 Investment 1,40,000
Vikash 80,000 Furniture 70,000
Building 2,30,000
7,00,000 7,00,000

--- Page 76 ---
Vikas died on 30th September, 2022. On the death of a partner, the partnership deed
provided for the following:
a) Deceased partner will be entitled to his share of profit up to the date of death
calculated on the basis of previous year’s profit.
b) His share in the Goodwill of the firm, calculated on the basis of 3 years’ purchase
of average profits of last four years.
Profits for the last four years ended 31st March were as follows:
2018–19: ₹.1,60,000
2019–20: ₹.1,00,000
2020–21: ₹.80,000
2021–22: ₹.60,000
c) Drawings of the deceased partner up to the date of death were ₹.20,000
d) Interest on capital was allowed@12% per annum.
Prepare Vikas’ Capital account to be rendered to his executors.
24 ‘KLN Ltd.’ invited applications for issuing 1,00,000 shares of ₹10 each at a premium 6
of ₹2 per share. The amount was payable as follows:
On Application — ₹.3 per share (including a premium ₹.1)
On Allotment — ₹.4 per share (including a premium ₹.1)
On the First Call — ₹.3 per share
On the Second and Final Call — Balance amount
Applications for 1,90,000 shares were received. The allotment was made on pro rata
basis to 1,50,000 applicants and balance are rejected.
Rajat, a shareholder who had applied for 2,400 shares, failed to pay the amount due
on the allotment and first call. His shares were immediately forfeited. Out of the forfeited
shares1,200 shares were reissued @ ₹.8 per share as fully paid up.
Pass the necessary journal entries for the above transactions in the books of ‘KLN Ltd’.
25 Dhwani and Iknoor were partners sharing Profits & Losses in the ratio 3:2. Their 6
Balance Sheet on March 31, 2025 was as follows
Liabilities Amount Assets Amount
(₹) (₹)
Dhwani’s Capital 2,40,000 Cash in Hand 50,000
Iknoor’s Capital 2,60,000 Building 3,00,000
Investment Fluctuation 50,000 Debtors 80,000 72,000
Reserve (-) Prov for
Doubtful Debts (8,000)
Employee Provident Fund 50,000 Stock 88,000
General Reserve 60,000 Accrued Income 20,000
Creditors 40,000 Investment 1,20,000
Bills Payable 30,000 Profit and Loss 1,00,000
Bank Overdraft 20,000
7,50,000 7,50,000
On the above date, they admitted Ishaan into partnership for 25% share. Ishaan brings
₹.2,50,000 as capital and ₹.40,000 for goodwill. Goodwill of the firm was valued at
₹.2,00,000. The followings were agreed upon: -
a) Bad Debts amounted to ₹.5,000 and Provision for doubtful debts to be created
at same existing rate.
b) Investments were valued at ₹.1,00,000.
c) Accrued Income was recovered only of ₹.14,500 in settlement.
d) Building was overvalued by 20%.
e) Capital of Dhwani and Iknoor were to be adjusted on the basis Ishaya’s capital
contribution.
Necessary adjustment to be done by opening Current Accounts. You are required to
prepare Revaluation Account and Partner’s Capital Account at the time of admission of
partner. (Or)

--- Page 77 ---
Aman, Barman and Raman were partners sharing Profits & Losses in the ratio 5:3:2.
Their Balance Sheet on March 31, 2025 was as follows
Liabilities Amount Assets Amount
(₹) (₹)
Aman’s Capital 80,000 Bank 30,000
Barman’s Capital 70,000 Building 1,00,000
Raman’s Capital 50,000 Furniture 60,000
Workmen Compensation 50,000 Debtors 50,000
Reserve
Accumulated Depreciation on 20,000 Stock 40.000
Building
Profit and Loss 40,000 Prepaid Expenses 20.000
Creditors 25,000 Deferred Revenue Exp. 20.000
Outstanding Expenses 15,000 Goodwill 30.000
3,50,000 3,50,000
On the above date Barman retired and his share was acquired by Aman and Raman
equally. The followings were agreed upon:-
a) Create Provision for doubtful debts @ 10%.
b) Market value of Building is ₹.1,00,000 and Furniture was overvalued by 20%.
c) Stock was valued at ₹.55,000. Creditors of ₹.15,000 took over stock of ₹.10,000
in settlement of their claims.
d) Goodwill of the firm was valued at ₹.80,000.
e) Prepaid Expenses are worthless and Outstanding Expenses are now ₹.20,000.
f) ₹.20,000 was immediately paid to Barman on retirement brought in by Aman and
Raman in the of ratio 3:2.
Prepare Revaluation Account and Partner’s Capital Account at the time of retirement of
partner.
26 From the following information, complete Journal entries: 6
Date Particulars LF Dr.(₹) Cr.(₹)
Share Capital A/c Dr. ?
Securities Premium A/c Dr. 1,000
To Share Forfeiture A/c ?
To Calls in Arrears A/c 3,500
(Being___?___ shares forfeited for non-payment
of ___?___ including premium of ₹2 per share)
Bank A/c Dr. ?
Share Forfeiture A/c Dr. ?
To Share Capital A/c ?
(Being ?__ shares reissued at ₹9 per share as
fully paid)
Share Forfeiture A/c Dr.
To Capital Reserve Alc 600
(Being forfeiture money transferred to capital 600
reserve)
Share Forfeiture Account
Date Particulars (₹) Date Particulars (₹)
To Share capital A/c ? By Share capital A/c 1,500
To Capital Reserve A/c 600
To Balance c/d 600
1,500 1,500
(Face value of share is 10 each)
(Or)

--- Page 78 ---
a. Raman Ltd forfeited 600 shares of Rs.10 each issued at a premium of Rs.2 per
share (Rs.8 called up) on which application money of Rs.3 and allotment money
Rs.7 (including premium) is received. Out of these, 400 shares are re-issued @
Rs.8 per share fully paid up. Pass journal entries.
b. Silver limited Purchased a running business of Alpha limited for Rs.22,00,000. The
company issued equity shares of Rs.10 each at a premium of 10% The business
comprises Building Rs.19,00,000, Machinery Rs.4,00,000, Debtor Rs.1,00,000,
Furniture Rs.1,50,000, Creditor Rs.2,00,000 and Bills payable Rs.1,00,000. Pass
journal entries.
Part – B
Financial Statement Analysis
27 Calculate the amount of change in inventories of finished goods, work-in-progress and 1
stock-in-trade, that will be shown in the Notes to Accounts from the following
information:
Particulars Opening Inventories (₹) Closing Inventories (₹)
Finished Goods 2,50,000 2,75,000
Work-in-progress (WIP) 2,25,000 2,12,500
Stock-in-Trade 3,25,000 3,00,000
a) ₹ 12,450 b) ₹ 12,500 c) ₹ 15,200 d) ₹ 12,540
28 The current assets of X Ltd. are ₹2,00,000 and its current liabilities are ₹1,50,000. If 1
its working capital turnover ratio is 6 times, its revenue from operations will be:
(a) ₹2,00,000 (b) ₹3,00,000
(c) ₹2,50,000 (d) ₹1,50,000
(OR)
If revenue from operations is ₹10,00,000 and gross profit is 25% on cost, cost of
revenue from operations will be:
(a) ₹2,50,000 (b) ₹12,50,000
(c) ₹2,00,000 (d) ₹8,00,000
29 Which of the following transactions will result into flow of cash? 1
(a) Deposited ₹.40,000 into bank.
(b) Withdrew cash from bank ₹.54,000.
(c) Sold marketable securities of ₹.25,000 at par.
(d) Sold machinery of book value of ₹.50,000 at a gain of ₹.10,000
30 Balance Sheet (an Extract) 1
Equity and Liabilities 31st March 2019 31st March 2019
12% Debentures 2,00,000 1,60,000
Additional Information:
Interest on debentures is paid on half yearly basis on 30th September and 31st March
each year. Debentures were redeemed on 30th September, 2019.
How much amount (related to above information) will be shown in Financing Activity
for Cash Flow Statement prepared on 31st March, 2020?
(a) Outflow ₹40,000 (b) Inflow ₹42,600
(c) Outflow ₹61,600 (d) Outflow ₹64,000
(OR)
From the following information, find out the inflow of Cash by sale of Office equipment.
31st March 2022 31st March 2021
Office Equipment 2,00,000 3,00,000
Additional Information:
Depreciation for the year 2021-22 was & 40,000. Office Equipment purchased during
the year ₹30,000. Part of Office Equipment sold at a profit of ₹12,000
(a) ₹ 1,00,000 (b) ₹ 1,02,000 (c) ₹ 90,000 (d) ₹ 1,12,000

--- Page 79 ---
31 Under what headings and sub-headings of the Balance Sheet of a company, following 3
will be presented:
(i) Proposed Dividend
(ii) Calls-in-Arrears
(iii) Outstanding Salary
(iv) Shares in D.C.R. Limited
32 Complete the following Comparative Balance Sheet as at March 31, 2024 and March 3
31, 2025:
PARTICULARS 31st March 31st March Absolute Percentage
2024 2025 Change Change
Shareholders' Funds 6,00,000 ?? 3,00,000 ??
Non-current Liabilities 3,00,000 ?? NIL ??
Current Liabilities ?? 3,00,000 2,00,000 ??
TOTAL ?? ?? ?? ??
Non-current Assets 7,00,000 ?? ?? 50
Current Assets ?? ?? ?? ??
TOTAL ?? ?? ?? ??
(OR)
Prepare Common Size Statement of Profit and Loss for the year ended March 31, 2025:
Particulars 31st March 2025
Revenue from Operations 40,00,000
Other Expenses 4,00,000
Other Income 6,00,000
Employee Benefit Expenses 8,00,000
Purchases of Stock in Trade 10,00,000
Change in Inventory (2,00,000)
33 . From the following information, compute ‘Debt to Equity Ratio’. 4
Particulars (₹)
Long-term Borrowings 2,00,000
Long-term Provisions 1,00,000
Current Liabilities 50,000
Non-current Assets 3,60,000
Current Assets 90,000
(OR)
Calculate the information asked in following cases:
(i) Current Liabilities ₹.1,50,000, Current Assets ₹.2,80,000, Inventories ₹.40,000,
Advance Tax ₹.30,000 and Prepaid Rent ₹.10,000.
Calculate Quick Ratio?
(ii) Average Inventory ₹.60,000, Revenue from Operations ₹.6,00,000, the rate of
Gross Loss on Sales is 10%.
Calculate the Inventory Turnover Ratio?

--- Page 80 ---
34 From the following Balance sheet of Mayur Ltd. And the additional information as at 31st 6
March, 2018, prepare a cash flow statement:
Notes to Account
Particulars Current Previous
Year (₹) Year (₹)
1.Reserves and Surplus
Surplus i.e. Balance in statement of profit and loss 3,00,000 4,00,000
2. Long-term Borrowings
9% Debentures 4,00,000 3,00,000
3. Short-term Provisions
Provision for Taxation 76,000 64,000
4. Property, Plant and Equipment
Machinery 36,00,000 28,00,000
Accumulated Depreciation (7,00,000) (5,00,000)
29,00,000 23,00,000
5. Intangible Assets
Goodwill 2,70,000 1,60,000
Balance Sheet of Mayur Ltd.
as at 31st March, 2018
Particulars Note 31st March, 31st March,
No. 2018 (₹) 2017 (₹)
I. EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
1. Shareholders’ Funds
(a) Share Capital 1 30,00,000 20,00,000
(b) Reserves and Surplus 3,00,000 4,00,000
2. Non-current Liabilities
(a) Long-term Borrowings 2 4,00,000 3,00,000
3. Current Liabilities
(a) Trade Payables 1,70,000 2,50,000
(b) Short-term Provisions 3 76,000 64,000
Total 39,46,000 30,14,000
II. ASSETS
1. Non-Current Assets
(a) Property, Plant and Equipment and
Intangible Assets
(i) Property, Plant and Equipment 4 29,00,000 23,00,000
(ii) Intangible Assets 5 2,70,000 1,60,000
(b) Non-current Investments
2. Current Assets
(a) Inventories 2,20,000 2,30,000
(b) Trade Receivables 1,10,000 1,30,000
(c) Cash and Cash Equivalents 4,46,000 1,94,000
Total 39,46,000 30,14,000
Additional Information
(i) During the year, a piece of machinery costing ₹.4,00,000 on which
accumulated depreciation was ₹.73,000 was sold for ₹.3,10,000.
(ii) 9% Debentures of ₹.1,00,000 were issued on 31st March, 2018.

--- Page 81 ---
SET - 1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION, (2025-26)
CLASS XII
SUBJECT- BUSINESS STUDIES (054)
Max.Marks - 80 Max. Time Allowed- 3 Hours
General Instructions:
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them:
(in) This question paper contains 34 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) Marks are indicated against each question.
(iii) Answers should be brief and to the point.
(iv) Answers to questions carrying 3 marks may be from 50 to 75 words.
(v) Answers to questions carrying 4 marks may be in about 150 words.
(vi)Answers to questions carrying 6 marks may be in about 200 words.
(vii) Attempt all parts of a question together.
Q.N Marks
1 The management of a bag manufacturing company has recently changed. Due to this, 1
an improvement can be felt in the way company functions. Now, targets are met
according to plans, whereas, earlier deadlines were never given importance. Now there
is orderliness, instead of chaos in the organisation and the employees are happy and
satisfied.
From the following identify the characteristic of management which is highlighted in the
above case:
(a) Management is dynamic
(b) Management is a group activity
(c) Management is a continuous process
(d) Management is an intangible force.
2 While conducting a survey Rajiv observed that although there was division of work in 1
every factory he visited, but the extent of division of work varied from factory to factory
depending upon the demand of the situation. Which feature of principle of management
is highlighted above?
(a) Flexible (b) Contingent
(c) General guidelines (d) Cause and effect
3 Gitanjali Makan is a successful business leader. She believes that if jobs are made 1
interesting by including greater variety of work content and providing a meaningful work
experience, the jobs themselves become a source of motivation to individuals.
The non-financial incentive that has been discussed in the above case is:
(a) Employee Participation (b) Job Enrichment
(c) Career Advancement Opportunity (d) Job Security
4 Read the following statements carefully: 1
Statement I : The development of the principles of management is considered science
and their application, is an art.
Statement II : The principles of management cannot be applied in all types of
organisations.
Choose the correct option from the options given below:
(a) Both the statements are true.
(b) Both the statements are false
(c) Statement I is true and statement II is false
(d) Statement I is false and statement II is true

--- Page 82 ---
5 Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the correct 1
alternative from those given below:
Assertion (A): The directing function takes place at every level of management.
Reason (R): Every manager, from top executive to supervisor performs the function of
directing.
Alternatives :
(a) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct
explanation of Assertion (A)
(b) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is not the correct
explanation of Assertion (A)
(c) Assertion (A) is true but Reason (R) is false
(d) Assertion (A) is false but Reason (R) is true
6 Cartoony Planet' is a well-known indoor playground for organising parties for children in 1
Noida. It has many play stations and it organises various activities for the kids to enjoy.
Looking at the increasing number of children visiting 'Cartoony Planet', a new indoor
playground in the name of 'Tiny-Tots House' came up with advanced swings, play
stations and entertainment activities near 'Cartoony Planet'. To compete with the newly
opened indoor playground, 'Cartoony Planet' also added some advanced swings and
entertainment activities to attract more children.
The above information highlights one of the features of business environment. Identify
the feature from the following:
(a) Uncertainty (b) Dynamic Nature
(c) Relativity (d) Interrelatedness
7 Marbury biscuits' launched its new range of oat cookies in three varieties. They decided 1
to distribute free samples of their biscuits in schools as a part of their promotional
campaign. Identify the tool of promotion used by 'Marbury Biscuits':
(a) Advertising (b) Personal Selling
(c) Sales Promotion (d) Public Relations
8 Which of the following statements is incorrect? 1
(a) Controlling should focus on Key Result Areas which are critical to the success of an
organization.
(b) Only significant deviations which go beyond the permissible limit should be brought
to the notice of the management.
(c) Comparison between actual and desired results is easier when standards are set in
quantitative terms.
(d) No corrective action is required when the deviations are outside the acceptable
limits.
9 Observe the picture and identify the step of staffing highlighted in it 1
(a) Recruitment
(b) Selection
(c) Estimating Manpower Requirements
(d) Placement and Orientation

--- Page 83 ---
10 In an organization, employees always feel that they are under enormous unnecessary 1
stress, as the manager does not provide any information about future plans but simply
instructs them what to do. He also does not listen to any of the suggestions given by the
subordinates. Identify the type of leadership style followed by the manager in the above
situation.
(a) Autocratic leadership style
(b) Free-rein leadership style
(c) Democratic leadership style
(d) All of the above
11 Identify the correct sequence of steps to be followed in the trading procedure at Stock 1
Exchange.
(a) Opening a trading account and demat account, Placing an order, Settlement of
order, Execution of order
(b) Settlement of order, Opening a trading account and demat account, Placing an
order, Execution of order
(c) Opening a trading account and demat account, Placing an order, Execution of order,
Settlement of order
(d) Placing an order, Opening a trading account and demat account, Execution of order,
Settlement of order
12 Identify the correct sequence of two-level-channel of distribution: 1
(a) Manufacturer → Retailer → Agent → Customer
(b) Manufacturer → Consumer → Retailer → Wholesaler
(c) Manufacturer → Agent → Customer → Retailer
(d) Manufacturer → Wholesaler → Retailer → Consumer
13 Match the concept of Management in Column I with their respective meaning in Column 1
II
Column I Column II
A. Effectiveness (i) Doing the task correctively with
B. Efficiency minimum cost
C. Process (ii) Finishing the task on time
(iii) The primary function or activities
that management performs to get
(a) A-(i), B-(ii), C—(iii) (b) A-(ii), B-(i), C-(iii)
(c) A-(iii), B-(ii), C(i) (d) A-(i), B-(iii), C-(ii)
14 'Uttam Ayurvedic Ltd. is an established Indian company manufacturing organic 1
consumer goods like toothpastes and shampoos. It has planned to increase its market
share from 30% to 40% in the current financial year.
With the expanding market of organic products, other companies in the consumer goods
industry have also launched these products with organic components. The competition
in the market has increased and it was found that the sales of Uttam Ayurvedic Ltd.
came down and its market share was reduced to 23%.
Identify the limitation of planning highlighted in the above case.
(a) Planning may not work in dynamic environment
(b) Planning is time consuming
(c) Planning involves huge costs
(d) Planning reduces overlapping and wasteful activities.
15 Which type of training is provided to the new employees of an organization in order to 1
familiarize them with the organizational rules and policies, their superior and
subordinate, and so on?
(a)Vestibule training (b) Apprenticeship training
(c)Internship training (d) Induction training

--- Page 84 ---
16 Which of the following statement is not correct? 1
(a) Financial leverage is the proportion of debt in the overall capital
(b) Purchase of Machinery is linked to working capital decision
(c) EPS will rise with increase in debt only when ROI < Cost of Debt
(d) Both (b) and (c)
17 The process of estimating fund requirements of a business and specifying the sources 1
of funds is called:
(a) Capital Structure (b) Financial Planning
(c) Financial Management (d) Capital Budgeting
18 Long term investment decision is also known as _____________ 1
(a) Working Capital
(b) Financing Decision
(c) Capital Budgeting Decision
(d) Dividend Decision
19 Net Working Capital refers to: 1
(a) Excess of Current Assets over Current Liabilities
(b) Excess of Current Liabilities over Current Assets
(c) Excess of Equity over Debt
(d) Excess of Debt over Equity
20 Financial transactions in a financial market could be in the form of: 1
(i) creation of financial assets such as the initial issue of shares and debentures by a
firm
(ii) purchase and sale of existing financial assets like equity shares, debentures and
bonds
(iii) investment in the fixed assets, like land and building, machinery, etc.
(iv) declaration of dividend to shareholders
Choose the correct option from the following:
(a) (i) and (ii) (b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv) (d) (i) and (iii)
21 Differentiate between Functional and Divisional Structure on the basis of: 3
(a) Formation
(b) Specialisation
(c) Cost involved
(OR)
Explain any three importance of Delegation.
22 Shyam brought a pain-relieving ointment after seeing it being displayed in the chemist’s 3
shop. The ointment tube was packed in a cardboard box.
Identify and explain the different levels of packaging of the pain reliving medicine, when
it was purchased by Shyam.
State another level of packaging which is not highlighted in the above case.
23 Give any three points of distinction between the primary market and secondary market. 3
(OR)
Give any three regulatory functions performed by Securities and
Exchange Board of India
24 After completing his MBA degree, Aman joined a multinational company 'Zeyovya Ltd.'. 3
His job demands long hours and commitment to the organisation. He is responsible for
integrating diverse elements and coordinating all the activities of the business and for its
impact on society. His job is complex and stressful.
(a) Identify the level of management at which Aman joined the organisation.
(b) State any two functions to be performed by Aman at this level other than those
discussed in the para.

--- Page 85 ---
25 Differentiate between 'Production concept' and 'Marketing concept' of marketing on the 4
basis of:
(a) Starting point
(b) Means
(c) Main focus
(d) Ends.
(OR)
RK motors recently informed the media about its aim to train up to 4,000 people in next
3 years in the skills associated with the automobiles industry as part of its program to
provide technical and vocational education for unemployed youth. The firm has already
started the program in collaboration with automobile skill development council. This
news in the media has helped the firm in promoting its image in the eyes of the public
and consumer activist groups.
Identify the element of Promotion mix is highlighted in the above case study and explain
its three role of the identified element.
26 4
Explain any four importance of planning in management.
(OR)
Explain the following types of plans:
(a) Strategy
(b) Procedure
27 India's craft heritage is surviving because of its customs and traditions. Craft products 4
made by craftsmen of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Assam, etc. are not only used in the country
but are also exported to USA, Germany, UK, France and other countries of the world.
The volume of exports of these products gives India an advantage in balance of
payments and the much needed foreign exchange. The Prime Minister desires that the
handicraft industry should be expanded by linking it with technology. Focus should be
on changing the manufacturing process, ensuring durability and adopting innovations.
Quoting the lines from the above paragraph, explain any four dimensions of the
business environment
28 'Planning and controlling are inseparable twins of management'. How? 4
29 'Work is Worship' is a leading construction company. The organisation has grown from 4
strength to strength because of its innovative ideas and scientific approach of working.
Ten years back the organisation went through a revolution. All the operations and
activities were properly noticed and the standard time taken to perform them was noted.
This took a few months and now the company could find out the amount of workers
required and the number of days to be involved in the various manufacturing processes.
A year later they moved to another level by considering the stress involved in the lives of
the workers. The amount and frequency of rest intervals in finishing a particular task
were noted. This helped the company in optimizing the rest intervals for the workers so
that their outputs could be increased. After six more months the company decided to
reward the efficient workers. A different rate of wage payment was decided for those
workers who performed above the standard. The standard was decided. This led to a
revolutionary change in the perspective of the workers who now started giving their full
efforts in order to increase their wages.
Name and explain briefly any two types of Techniques of Scientific Management
highlighted above. Also quote the lines where these types have been indicated.

--- Page 86 ---
30 Vandana Public School had a vacancy of a Maths teacher. They were looking for a 4
smart and creative teacher having a drive for excellence. An advertisement was given in
all leading dailies. Since the response was huge, the school examined all the application
forms and rejected the candidates who did not have the necessary qualifications.
Thereafter, a test was conducted to measure the existing skills of the candidates. After
that it was followed by a formal in-depth conversation with the Principal of the school
and a panel of Maths experts.
(a) Explain the steps that have been performed by Vandana Public School in the
process of identifying and choosing the best candidate.
(b) Give the name and also the meaning of the test which was conducted by the school
31 Sahaj Ltd. is a company engaged in production of organic foods. Presently, it sells its 6
products through indirect channels of distribution. But, considering the sudden surge in
the demand for organic products, the company is now inclined to start its online portal
for direct marketing. The financial managers of the company are planning to use debt in
order to take advantage of trading on equity. In order to finance its expansion plans, it is
planning to, raise a debt capital of Rs. 40 lakhs through a loan @ 10% from an industrial
bank. The present capital base of the company comprises of Rs. 9 lakh equity shares of
Rs. 10 each. The rate of tax is 30%. In the context of the above case:
(1) What are the two conditions necessary for taking advantage of trading on equity?
(2) Assuming the expected rate of return on investment to be same as it was for the
current year i.e. 15% , do you think the financial managers will be able to meet their
goal. Show your workings clearly.
32 Neeraj, a sales representative of ‘Omida Ltd’ has changed seven jobs in the last one 6
year. He is a hard working person but is not able to finalize deals with the customer due
to his inadequate vocabulary and omission of needed words. Sometimes he uses wrong
words because of which intended meaning is not conveyed. All this created a mis-
understanding between him and his clients.
a. Identify the communication barrier discussed above.
b. State the category of this communication barrier.
c. Explain any other communication barrier of the same category.
d. Explain two measures to overcome such barriers for effective communication.
33 The G20 Summit was organised in India. The government left no stone unturned to 6
make G20 summit a sucess.
At the higher level, the work to be performed was identified and grouped to enable
people to work most effectively together for accomplishing objectives. This involved
building infrastructure, beautification of the city, hospitality, security arrangements etc.
Duties were assigned to different job positions which led to establishment of clear
relationships. This helped in creating a hierarchical structure and in co-ordination
amongst all working for the summit.
(a) Identify and explain the function of management discussed in the above para.
(b) Explain any four points of importance of the function identified in part (a) above
34 Enumerate any five rights of a consumer under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019. 6
(OR)
Reena purchased one litre of pure Deshi Ghee from a shopkeeper. After using it, she
had a doubt that it is adulterated. She sent it for a laboratory test which confirmed that
the Ghee is adulterated. State any six reliefs available to Reena, if she complaints and
the consumer court is satisfied about the genuineness the complaint.

--- Page 87 ---
SET-1
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION-I
CLASS: - XII (2025-26)
SUBJECT: - ECONOMICS (030)
TIME: 3 HOURS M.M. – 80
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:
I. This question paper contains two sections:
Section A – Introductory Macro Economics
Section B – Indian Economic Development
II. This paper contains 20 Multiple Choice Type Questions of 1 mark each.
III. This paper contains 4 Short Answer Type Questions of 3 marks each to be answered in 60 to 80
words.
IV. This paper contains 6 Short Answer Type Questions of 4 marks each to be answered in 80 to
100 words.
V. This paper contains 4 Long Answer Type Questions of 6 marks each to be answered in 100 to
150 words.
VI. The above word limits are not applicable to Numerical Questions.
SL. SECTION A – INTRODUCTORY MACRO ECONOMICS Marks
NO
1. In an economy, the saving and investment functions are given as 1
S= -100+0.2Y
I= 40
On the basis of the given information, the equilibrium level of income will
be_________.
a) 600 b) 700 c) 1000 d)900
2. If nominal GDP is Rs 600cr and the value of GDP deflator is 120, find the value 1
of real GDP.
a) Rs. 480cr b)Rs. 720cr c)Rs. 500cr d)Rs. 50 cr
3. Read the following statements carefully 1
Statement 1: The RBI maintains the cash reserves of the commercial banks and the
country’s foreign exchange reserves.
Statement II: The RBI accepts deposits from the general public and creates credit in
the economy.
In light of the given statements, choose the correct option from the following.
a) Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
b) Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
c) Both statements I and II are true.
d) Both statements I and II are false.
4. Read the following statements carefully 1
Statement 1: Devaluation of currency is said to occur when the exchange rate is
decreased under the fixed exchange rate system.
Statement II: Under the floating exchange rate system, competent authorities do not
maintain foreign exchange reserves.
In light of the given statement, choose the correct option from the following.
a) Statement I is true but Statement II is false.
b) Statement I is false but Statement II is true.
c) Both statements I and II are true.
d) Both statements I and II are false.
1

--- Page 88 ---
5. Read the following figure carefully and choose the correct answer from the alternatives given 1
below:
The flow in the outer circle of the picture is a …………………. Flow.
A) Nominal Flow B) Real Flow
C) Circular flow D) Both A & B
6. y 1
S= -50+0.2Y
O
B x
Income
A
With reference to the above diagram, which of the following is true at point B?
a) APS=1, APC=0 b) APS=0, APC=1 c) APS>0, APC<1 D) APS<0, APC>1
7. Read the following statements- Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose one of the correct 1
alternatives from those given below:-
Assertion (A) – Real gross domestic product is a better indicator of economic growth
of a nation as compared to nominal gross domestic product.
Reason (R) – Real gross domestic product measures the value of goods and services
at current year prices
a) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct explanation
of Assertion(A).
b) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is not the correct
explanation of Assertion (A)
c) Assertion (A) is true and Reason (R) is false
d) Assertion (A) is false and Reason (R) is true.
8. Alisha went to the bank for a loan. She deposits her jewelry against the loan as a 1
security. The market value of the security is 10 Lakh. The bank given 8 Lakh as a
loan to Alisha. Find the value of Margine requirement kept by the bank.
a) 10% b) 20% c) 30% d)40%
2

--- Page 89 ---
9. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the correct 1
option from those given below:
Assertion (A): External Assistance is recorded in the Current Account of the Balance of
Payments of a nation.
Reason (R): External Assistance includes bilateral and multilateral loans
received/extended by a nation.
Options:
A. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct explanation
of Assertion (A).
B. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not the correct
Explanation of Assertion (A).
C. Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.
D. Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true.
10. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the correct option 1
from those given below:
Assertion (A): In India, no one can refuse to accept payment made in currency notes.
Reason (R): Currency notes are unlimited legal tender in India.
Options:
A. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct explanation
of Assertion (A).
B. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not the correct
Explanation of Assertion (A).
C. Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.
D. Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true.
11. Calculate the value of “Change in stock” from the following data. 3
SL.NO. Items Amount (in Crores)
I Sales 400
II Net Value Added at Factor Cost(NVAfc) 200
III Subsidies 10
IV Change in stock ?
V Depreciation 40
VI Intermediate consumption 100
12. The power of commercial banks which enables them to expand their deposits through 3
loans is called credit creation. Legal Reserve Ratio (LRR) is the minimum reserve that a
commercial bank must maintain in a liquid form as per the instructions of the Central bank.
LRR has two components (i) Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)-It is the fraction of net total
demand and time deposits that commercial banks must keep as cash reserves with Central
bank. (ii) Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) – it is the fraction of net total demand and time
deposits that commercial banks must keep with themselves in the form of specified liquid
assets.
Assumptions of Credit creation-
(i)There is a single banking system in the economy.
(ii)All transactions are routed through the banks Commercial banks are called the factories
of credit. They advance much more than what they collect from the public in the form of
deposits. Through the process of credit creation, the commercial banks provide finance to
all the sectors of economy.
1.Which bank is called the factory of credit creation?
a. Govt. b. Commercial Bank c. LIC d. None of these
2.If CRR=5% and LRR=20% then what is the SLR?
a.5% b.10% c.15% d.None of these
3

--- Page 90 ---
3. Which of the following is NOT the assumptions of credit creation process?
a.There is a multiple banking system in the economy.
b. All transactions are routed through the banks.
c.Both a and b
d.None of these.
OR
“Central bank acts as the banker to the Government”. Elaborate the given statement. 3
13. “GDP at constant prices is often considered a better measure of economic growth than 4
GDP at current prices”. Do you agree? Justify your answer.
14. Read the passage given below and answer the questions that follow. 4
A change in the rupee-dollar exchange rate represents the change in external value of
rupee. The value of rupee, in terms of dollar, has been falling continuously over a period
of time. Since rupee-dollar exchange rate is determined by the demand for and supply of
dollars, it is possible that the value of rupee slides further if appropriate measures are not
taken.
The Reserve Bank of India, in-charge of both internal and external value of rupee, has
repeatedly emphasized on maintaining stability in the foreign exchange market.
(i) What kind of exchange rate system is being referred to in the passage?
(ii) 'The value of rupee, in terms of dollar, has been falling continuously over a period of
time. Give the economic term for this phenomenon.
(iii) How would this phenomenon affect the export?
OR
Differentiate between Balance of Trade and Balance of Payment. 4
15. Given consumption function C = 100 + 0.75Y (where C = consumption expenditure 4
and Y = National Income) and investment expenditure Rs. 1000, calculate.
(i) Equilibrium level of National income
(ii) Consumption expenditure at equilibrium level of National Income
16. A- What do you mean by fiscal policy? How is fiscal policy used to solve the problem 3
of excess demand and deficient demand?
B- In an economy the planned investment is higher than planned saving. Explain the 3
chain of operations to be followed to restore equilibrium in the economy.
17. 3+2+1
(A) On the basis of the given information, calculate the value of:
(i) Fiscal deficit
(ii) Primary deficit
S.No. Items 2024-25(₹in crore)
(i) Revenue Receipts 20
(ii) Capital Expenditure 15
(iii) Revenue Expenditure 10
(iv) Non-debt creating capital 50% of revenue receipts
receipts
(v) Interest Payments 4
4

--- Page 91 ---
(B) State any two features of public goods.
OR
3+3
(C) Explain the economic stability objective of Government Budget.
(D) ‘Under the Ayushmaan Bharat Scheme, the Government provides free
medicines to the economically backward section of the society’.
Identify and discuss the nature of the government expenditure indicated in the
given
statement.
SECTION B – INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
18. Read the following statement and answer the question that follows: 1
“Disguised unemployment is a situation where more people are employed than actually
needed.”
Question:
Which of the following statements correctly explains the above situation?
A. All workers are working full-time and efficiently.
B. Removal of a few workers does not affect total output.
C. Workers are fully and productively employed.
D. All workers contribute equally to production.
19. 1
Read the following statement and choose one of the correct alternatives given below:
Statement 1: Under the New Economic Policy, quantitative restrictions on imports and
exports were greatly reduced.
Statement 2: Import duties were considerably increased in the New Economic Policy to
improve the competitiveness of domestic industries.
a) Both the statement is true.
b) Both the statement is false.
c) Statement (1) is true but Statement (2) is false
d) Statement (1) is false but Statement (2) is true
20. 1
Khusbu decides to pursue higher education in engineering. Later, she earns a
higher income and contributes more to the country’s production.
Which economic concept does this situation best illustrate?
a) Human development b) Human capital formation
c) Employment generation d) Social welfare
21. 1
Assertion (A): Rural credit is essential for agricultural growth in India.
Reason (R): Farmers need funds to buy modern inputs like HYV seeds, fertilizers, and
machinery.
Choose the correct option:
a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
c) A is true, but R is false.
d) A is false, but R is true.
22. 1
From the set of the events given in columa A and the corresponding year in column
B, choose the incorrect pair:
Column I Column ll
(A) First official census of India 1881
(B) Opening of suez canal 1969
5

--- Page 92 ---
(C ) Incorporation of TISCO 1907
(D)Introduction of railway 1950
23. Assertion (A): Self Help Groups (SHGs) play an important role in promoting rural 1
development in India.
Reason (R): SHGs encourage individual savings and provide easy access to formal
credit to rural poor, especially women.
Options:
A. Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
B. Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
C. A is true, but R is false.
D. A is false, but R is true.
24. 1
The population explosion and advent of Industrial Revolution led to the ____.
(Choose the correct option to fill up the blank)
A. reversal of supply-demand relationship of environmental resources
B. decrease in demand for environmental resources
C. decrease in the average temperature of the earth’s lower atmosphere
D. increase in the environmental quality
25. Observe the image carefully: 1
Choose the correct option which indicates
arresting of felling of Trees and related
environmental concerns in Karnataka.
(a) Chipko Movement
(b) Appiko Movement
(c) Plateauco Movement
(d) Siftico Movement
26. 1
GLF campaign started by China in the year __________.
(a) 1968 (b) 1958 (c) 1978 (d) 1998
27. 1
The key figure behind India's White Revolution is___________ .
a) M S Swaminathan b) Dr. Verghese Kurien
c) Indira Gandhi d) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
28. Compare and analsye the following information related to Annual Growth of 3
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of India and China.
Country 1980-90 2015-17
India 5.7 7.3
China 10.3 6.8
29. In a survey of a small town, it was found that: 3
 Out of 5,000 people, 3,200 were working.
 300 people were looking for jobs but could not find any.
 The rest were not part of the labour force (students, elderly, etc.).
Based on this data, answer the following:
a. Calculate the Workforce Participation Rate (WPR).
6

--- Page 93 ---
b. Identify the type of unemployment reflected in this situation.
c. Suggest one measure to reduce such unemployment.
OR
Define Environment. What are the functions of environment? 3
30. Read the following passage and answer the questions: 4
In 1991, India faced a severe balance of payments crisis. Foreign exchange reserves had
fallen sharply, and the country struggled to pay for essential imports. The government
responded by introducing the New Economic Policy, which focused on liberalisation,
privatisation, and globalisation (LPG). Restrictions on imports and investments were
reduced, public sector monopolies were curtailed, and foreign investment was
encouraged.
Questions:
a. What was the main reason for introducing the New Economic Policy in 1991?
b. Explain one measure taken under liberalisation.
c. How did privatisation aim to improve the Indian economy?
d. Give one positive outcome of the New Economic Policy.
OR
What were the main causes of India’s agricultural stagnation during the colonial period? 4
31. (I) “India has been a part of many regional and global economic groupings such as G20, 3
SAARC, BRICS etc.”
In the light of the given statement, briefly explain the importance of regional and global
economic groupings. 1
(II) Define ‘Special Economic Zone’.
32. Identify the activity in the Picture. Explain how it contributes to the rural development in
the Indian economy? 4
33. (a) “ The process of globalisation through liberalisation and privatisation has produced 3
positive, as well as, negative results for India.” Do you agree with the given statement?
Give valid explanation in support of your answer.
(b) “The Government of India was compelled to introduce the economic reforms of 1991.” 3
State any two reasons behind the introduction of Economic Reforms of 1991.
OR
Read the following hypothetical text and answer the given questions: The performance of
the Indian economy during the period of first seven five-year plans (1950-1990) was
satisfactory if not very impressive. On the eve of independence, India was an industrially
backward country, but during this period of first seven plans our industries became far
more diversified, with the stress being laid on the public investments in the industrial
sector. The policy of import substitution led to protection of the domestic industries
7

--- Page 94 ---
against the foreign producers but we failed to promote a strong export surplus. Although
the public sector expanded to a large extent, it could not bring the desired level of
improvement in the secondary sector. Excessive government regulations prevented the
natural trajectory of growth of entrepreneurship as there was no competition, no
innovation and no modernization on the front of the industrial sector. Many Public Sector
Undertakings (PSU’s) incurred huge losses due to operational inefficiencies, red- tapism,
poor technology and other similar reasons. These PSU’s continued to function because it
was difficult to close a government undertaking even if it was a drain on the country's
limited resources. On the Agricultural front, due to the measures taken under the Green
Revolution, India more or less became self-sufficient in the production of food grains. So
the need for reform of economic policy was widely felt in the context of changing the
global economic scenario to achieve desired growth in the country.
Q-1 What are the reasons for the public sector to play a major role in the initial
phase of Indian Economic Planning? 2
Q - 2 write benefits of inward-looking trade strategy. (Any two) 2
Q-3 Write two benefits of Green revolution. 2
34. Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow:
India’s economic growth largely depends on the productivity of its workforce. Investment
in education, health, and skill development enhances the abilities of people, enabling them
to contribute more effectively to the economy. Countries that have invested heavily in
human capital, like South Korea and Japan, have witnessed rapid growth and higher per
capita income. In India, despite efforts in literacy and health improvement, challenges like
low skill levels, malnutrition, and regional disparities still affect productivity.
Questions: 1.5
a. Define human capital formation.
b. Explain any two ways through which investment in human capital increases 1.5
productivity.
c. Identify two challenges India faces in human capital formation. 1.5
d. Give one example of a government initiative to improve human capital in India 1.5
8

--- Page 95 ---
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN, BHUBANESWAR REGION
PRE-BOARD-1 QUESTION PAPER-2025-26
CLASS-XII
SUBJECT: - HISTORY (027)
TIME:-3 HOURS Maximum Marks:-80
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:
I. All questions are compulsory.
II. Question paper comprises five section-A, B, C, D and E .There are 34 questions in the
question paper.
III. Section A-Question 1 to 21 are MCQs of 1 mark each.
IV. Section B- Question no. 22 to 27 are Short answer type questions, carrying 3 marks
each. Answer to each question should not exceed 60-80 words.
V. Section C- Question no. 28 to 30 are Long answer type questions, carrying 8 marks
each. Answer to each question should not exceed 300-350 words.
VI. Section D- Question no. 31 to 33 are Source Based questions with three sub questions
and are of 4 marks each.
VII. Section E- Question no. 34 is Map Based, carrying 5 marks that includes the
identification and location of significant test items. Attach the map with the answer book.
VIII. There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been
provided in few questions. Only one of the choices in such questions have to be
attempted.
IX. In addition to this, separate instructions are given with each section and question
wherever necessary.
SECTION-A
Q.1.Which of the following places of Harappan Civilisation is associated with fire altars? 1
(a) Harappa. (b) Kalibanga
(c) Mohenjo-Daro (d) Rakhigarhi
Q.2.Which one of the following is NOT a correct statement about Mahajanpadas? 1
(a)Most Mahajanpadas were ruled by Kings.
(b) Some known as ganas or sanghars were oligarchies.
(c) Each Mahajanpadas had a capital city which was often fortified.
(d) Panchala became the most powerful Mahajanpada between 6th - 4th centuries BCE
Q.3 Match the following and select the correct option:- 1
List 1 List 2
1. Numismatics a. land granted to a Brahmana
2. Periplus of the b. the study of coins including visual elements
Erythraean Sea
3. Votive inscriptions c. record gifts made to religious institutions.
4. Agrahara d. sailing around the Red Sea
Options:-
(a) 1-b, 2-d, 3-c, 4- a. (b) 1-b, 2-a, 3-c, 4-d.
(c) 1-d, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c (d) 1-a, 2-c, 3-d, 4-b
Q.4.Which of the following statements are true regarding Mahabharata? 1
(i) The Sanskrit version of Mahabharata is far simpler than Vedas.
(ii) Historians classified Mahabharata into two broad heads as the narrative and the

--- Page 96 ---
didactic.
(iii) The Mahabharata is a dynamic text.
(iv) Didactic portion was first to be written.
Options:-
(a) i, ii and iii. (b) i, iii and iv. (c) ii, iii and iv. (d) i, ii and iv
Q.5.Which of the following is an example of a patrilineal society? 1
(a) A society where property is inherited by daughters
(b) A society where the mother's family is considered more important
(c) A society where the father's family is considered more important
(d) A society where property is distributed equally among all family members
Q.6.Which of the following statements regarding Colin Mackenzie are correct? Choose the
correct option:- 1
I. The ruins of Hampi were brought to light in 1800 by him.
II. He was an official of East India Company.
III. He prepared the first survey maps of the site.
IV. He received information of Vijayanagar Empire from Duarte Barbosa.
Options:-
(a) I, II and III. (b) II, III and IV
(c) I, III and IV. (d) I, II and IV
Q.7.Which one of the following pair is correctly matched? 1
LIST- 1( Name of Important Committees of Constituent LIST-2 ( Name of President)
Assembly)
(a)Flag Committee H.C.Mukhrjee
(b) Union Power Committee Pandit J.L.Nehru
(c ) Rules of Procedure Committee S.Varadachariar
(d) States Committee J.B. Kripalani
Q.8.What was the role of the Constituent Assembly in shaping India's democratic values? 1
(a) It established a monarchy
(b) It promoted a single-party system
(c) It ensured the representation of diverse interests
(d) It created a framework for democratic governance
Q.9.Arrange the following historical events in a correct chronological order and choose
the correct options:- 1
I. Making of the Constituent Assembly
II. Jallianwala Bagh Massacre
III. Quit India Movement
IV. Gandhi - Irwin Pact
Options:-
(a) II, III, I and IV. (b) II, IV, III and I
(c) III, II, I and IV. (d) IV, III, I and II
Q.10.Which one of the following was a key feature of the 'Subsidiary Alliance’ introduced by
Lord Wellesley in 1798? 1
(a) Free Trade Policy brought by British.
(b) Maintenance of native army by British.
(c) Imposition of Western Customs by British.
(d) Protection of native territory by British.
Q.11. In the following questions, a statement of assertion followed by a statement of reason is

--- Page 97 ---
given. Choose the correct answer out of the choices. 1
Assertion (A): The Revolt of 1857 led to significant changes in British policy towards India.
Reason (R): The British government abolished the East India Company and took direct control of
India.
(a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) A is true, but R is false
(d) A is false, but R is true
Q.12. Consider the following statements regarding the establishment of British East India
Company in Bengal:- 1
1. The Permanent Settlement had come into operation in 1793.
2. In 1797 there was an auction in Burdwan, during which a number of Mahals held by the
Raja of Burdwan were being sold.
3. The estates of those who failed to pay were to be auctioned to recover the revenue.
Which of the following statement(s) is/are correct?
(a) Only 1. (b) 1 & 2. (c) 1&2. (d) 1, 2 & 3
Q.13. Imagine you are a British colonial administrator tasked with implementing a new land
revenue policy in rural India. What would be the most effective way to minimise
resistance from peasants? 1
(a) Imposing harsh penalties for non-payment
(b) Offering incentives for timely payment
(c) Consulting with local leaders and considering their concerns
(d) Ignoring peasant grievances
Q.14. Though agriculture was labour intensive, peasants did use technologies in the 17th
century. Which of the following was not technology based? 1
(a) Use of wooden plough with an iron tip or coulter
(b) A drill, pulled by a pair of giant oxen
(c) Seed broadcasting
(d) Hoeing and weeding by using a narrow iron blade
Q.15.Choose the correct option: The book deals with the fiscal side of the empire and
Provides rich quantitative information on revenue rates. 1
(a)Manzil-abadi. (b)Sipah-abadi. (c ) Mulk- abadi (d) Aam - abadi
Q.16. Al-Biruni’s major work 'Kitab-ul-Hind’ is significant for its comprehensive study of
India. Which of the following was the primary aim of this book? 1
(a)Promote Islamic teachings (b) Map geographical locations.
(c) Document Indian culture. (d) Critique culture and traditions
Q.17.Which of the following statements is/are correct about François Bernier? 1
1. He was a doctor, political philosopher and historian.
2. He was closely associated with Danishmand Khan, an Armenian noble.
3. He was in India for 12 years, from 1656 to 1668.
4. He translated the Mahabharata into English.
Options:-
(a)1,2,3,4. (b) 1, 2, 3. (c) 1, 3, 4. (d) 2,3,4
Q.18 In a modern city, a group of friends discuss the relevance of Kabir’s teachings in
today’s society. Some believe these are outdated, while other see their
significance in promoting equality and love. Which of these scenario best reflects
Kabir’s relevance today? 1
(a) A debate on Kabir’s historical context.

--- Page 98 ---
(b) A discussion dismissing spirituality irrelevant.
(c) Focus on societal norms and trades only.
(d) Seeking simple connection with the divine.
Q.19. It is a sculpture depicting the departure of the Buddha from his palace. Identify the Picture
from the given options. 1
(a) A sculpture from Sanchi
(b) A sculpture from Shah ji-ki-Dheri
(c) A sculpture from Bharhut
(d) A sculpture from Amravati
Q.20 “Be lamps unto yourselves as all of you must work out your own liberation.” Identify the
essence of the words of Buddha from the options given below: 1
(a) One should connect to inner being.
(b) should live life of brahmacharya
(c) One should focus and express feelings
(d) One should spread religion everywhere.
Q.21 In the following questions, a statement of assertion followed by a statement of reason is
given. Choose the correct answer out of the choices. 1
Assertion (A):- The Bhakti saints used vernacular languages to compose devotional poetry
and songs.
Reason (R) :- They wanted to reach a limited audience and make spiritual knowledge
accessible to them.
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(c) A is true but R is false.
(d) A is false but R is true.
SECTION-B
Q.22. Describe briefly the sources used for reconstructing the history of the Gupta rulers. 3
OR 3
How has a coinage played a valuable role in determining certain period of Indian history?
Q.23. Describe the various stages through which Mahabharata was compiled in the 20th
century. Discuss any three points. 3
Q.24. Bernier's description of imperial land ownership influenced Western theorists like French
philosopher Montesquieu and German Karl Marx.” Justify it with suitable arguments. 3
Q.25.“Historians who have carefully studied the Ain-i-Akbari point out that it is not without it's
problems.” Analyse the limitations of Ain-i-Akbari as a source of Akbar's region. 3
Q.26 “The battle between the hoe and plough was a long one.” Justify the statement with
suitable examples. 3

--- Page 99 ---
Q.27 “The three lists of subjects provided by the Drafting Committee in the Constituent
Assembly prevent conflict among the levels of the governments”. Examine the statement
with relevant examples. 3
OR
Explain the ideals introduced by Jawaharlal Nehru in the 'Objectives Resolution’ that were kept in
mind while framing the Constitution of India. 3
SECTION-C
Q.28 Examine how the fortification system of the Vijayanagar Empire reflected it's military
strategies, urban planning and socio-political priorities. 8
OR
Discuss the significance of the rituals associated with the Mahanavami Dibba. 8
Q.29 Discuss the point that newspapers in the Gandhian era were not merely a means of news
reporting but instruments of political mobilisation. How were they used during the National
Movement? 8
OR
Explain how different kinds of sources help to reconstruct Gandhiji's political career and the history
of the National Movement. 8
Q.30 Explain why many scholars believe there may have been rulers in the Harappan society. 8
OR
How did the trade in Harappan-crafted goods impact economic interactions with neighboring
regions? 8
SECTION-D
Q.31 Read the given passage and answer the following questions: 4
Buddhism in practice
This is an excerpt from the Sutta Pitaka and contains the advice given by the Buddha to a
wealthy householder named Sigala;
In five ways, a master should look after his servants and employees… by assigning them work
according to their strength, by supplying them food and wages, by tending to them in sickness,
by sharing delicacies with them and by granting leave at times…
In five ways, the clansmen should look after the needs of samana( those who have renounced
the world) and Brahmanas: by affection in act, speech and mind, by keeping open house to
them and supplying their worldly needs.
There are similar instructions to Sigala about how to behave with his parents, teacher and wife.
(i) Explain the significance of the Sutta Pitaka in Buddhism. 1
(ii) How did Buddha advice the wealthy householders to be human and ethical? 1
(iii) What do you think was the advice given by Buddha to Sigala on how to behave with his
parents and teachers? 2
Q.32 Read the given passage and answer the following questions: 4
The One Lord
Here is a composition attributed to Kabir:
Tell me, brother, how can there be No one lord of the world but two?
Who led you so astray?
God is called by many names: Names like Allah, Ram, Karim, Keshav, Hari, and Hazrat.
Gold may be shaped into rings and bangles.
Isn't it gold all the same?
Distinctions are only words we invent….
Kabir says they are both mistaken.
Neither can find the only Ram. One kills the goat, the other cows.
They waste their lives in disputation.

--- Page 100 ---
(i) How has Kabir advocated an inclusive and compassionate view of humanity? 1
(ii) How did Kabir describe the ultimate reality? 1
(iii) How does Kabir's philosophy contribute to a broader understanding of spiritualism? 2
Q.33 Read the given passage and answer the following questions: 4
Maulvi Ahmadullah Shah
Maulvi ahmadulla Shah was one of the many moles who played an important part in the revolt
of 1857. Educated in Hyderabad, he became a preacher when young. In 1856, he was seen
moving from village to village preaching Jehad (religious war) against the British and urging
people two rebel. He moved in a palanquin, with drumbeaters in front and followers at the rear.
He was therefore popularly called Danka Shah- the maulvi with the drum (danka). British
officials panicked as thousands began following the maulvi and many Muslims began seeing
him as an inspired prophet. When he reached Lucknow in 1856 he was stopped by the police
from preaching in city. Subsequently, in 1857, he was jailed in Faizabad. When released, he
was elected by the mutinous 22nd Native Infantry as their leader. He fought in the famous Battle
of Chinhat in which the British forces under Henry Lawrence were defeated. He came to be
known for his courage and power. Many people in fact believed that he was invincible, had
magical powers, and could not be killed by the British. It was this belief that partly formed the
basis of his authority.
(i) By what name was Maulvi Ahmadullah Shah popularly known? 1
(ii) How did Maulvi ahmadulla Shah contribute to the Revolt of 1857? 1
(iii) What beliefs about Maulvi Ahmadullah Shah contributed to his influence during the revolt? 2
SECTION-E
Q.34 (i) On the given political map of India, locate and lebel the following with appropriate symbols:
3
a. Lothal- a mature Harappan site
b. Ajmer- Dargha of Garibnawaz
c. Kaushambi- a pillar inscription
OR
d. Taxila- an ancient learning centre.
34.(ii) On the same outline map two places have been marked as A and B, which are the
centres of Indian national Movement. Identify them and write their correct names on the lines
drawn near them. 2
************

--- Page 102 ---
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN BHUBANESWAR REGION
FIRST PRE-BOARD EXAMINATION 2025-26 (SET-I)
CLASS: XII (HUMANITIES) SUBJECT: GEOGRAPHY (029)
TIME ALLOWED: 3.00 HOURS MAXIMUM MARKS: 70
GENERALI NSTRUCTIONS:
1. This question paper contains 30 questions. All questions are compulsory.
2. This question paper is divided into five sections. Sections-A, B, C, D and E.
3. Section A- Question number 1 to 17are Multiple Choice type questions carrying 1 mark each.
4. Section B- Question number 18 and 19are Source based questions carrying 3 marks each.
5. Section C- Question number 20 to 23are Short Answer type questions carrying 3 marks each.
Answer to these questions shall be written in 80 to 100 words.
6. Section D- Question number 24 to 28are Long Answer type questions carrying 5 marks each.
Answer to these questions shall be written in 120 to 150 words.
7. Section E- Question number 29 and 30are Map based questions carrying 5 marks each.
8. In addition to this, note that a separate question has been provided for Visually Impaired
candidates in lieu of questions having visual inputs map etc. Such questions are to be attempted
by Visually Impaired candidates only.
9. There is no overall choice given in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been
provided in a few questions in all sections, except Section A.
SL. QUESTIONS MARK
NO S
.
SECTION-A
1 Refer to the bar graph displaying the population of various countries. 1
How many countries shown in the graph have a population of 200 million or
more?

--- Page 103 ---
A. 3
B. 5
C. 4
D. 6
The following question is for Visually Impaired Candidates only in lieu of
Question No.1.
Which country has the highest population in the American continent?
A. Brazil
B. Mexico
C. U.S.A.
D. Argentina
2 Study the graph given below and answer the following. 1
A country is currently experiencing high fertility and high mortality because
people reproduce more to compensate for the deaths due to epidemics and
variable food supply. The population growth is slow and most of the people are
engaged in agriculture where large families are an asset. Based on the
Demographic Transition Theory, this country is most likely in which stage?
A. Stage I: High Fluctuating
B. Stage II: Expanding
C. Stage III: Low Fluctuating
D. Pre-Transition Phase
The following question is for Visually Impaired Candidates only in lieu of
Question No.2.
Which of the following is a characteristic of stage one of the Demographic
Transition Theory?
A. High fertility and high mortality
B. Both fertility and mortality declined considerably
C. High growth of population
D. Fertility rate is high, and the mortality rate declines

--- Page 104 ---
3 Countries with HDI below 0.550 are mostly characterized by— 1
A. Rapid industrial growth and high per capita income
B. Political turmoil, social instability, and poor health facilities
C. Strong educational and healthcare infrastructure
D. High levels of human security and equity
4 Assertion (A): Natural growth of population includes migration factors. 1
Reason (R): Natural growth depends on the difference between birth rate and
death rate.
A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A).
C. (A) is true, but (R) is false.
D. (A) is false, but (R) is true.
5 Select the activity that does not belong to the quaternary sector: 1
A. Tax consultant providing information-based services
B. Research scientist developing new medicines
C. Accountant preparing financial statements for clients
D. Delivery person transporting products to retailers
6 Match the pillars of Human Development with their characteristics: 1
Policies/Initiatives Pillar of Human Development
1. Promoting community a. Equity
involvement in decision-making
2. Ensuring training programs for b. Sustainability
youth to enhance work skills
3. Conserving natural resources for c. Empowerment
future generations
4. Providing equal healthcare d. Productivity
facilities to all regions
A. 1-a, 2-b, 3-c, 4-d
B. 1-b, 2-a, 3-d, 4-c
C. 1-c, 2-d, 3-b, 4-a
D. 1-d, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b
7 Identify the incorrect statement about Regional Trade Blocs: 1
A. Regional Trade Blocs promote trade among geographically close
countries with complementary products.
B. They were formed because global organizations successfully promoted
intra-regional trade.
C. Regional Trade Blocs remove trade tariffs within member nations.
D. Free trade between different trading blocs may face difficulties in the
future.

--- Page 105 ---
8 The given graph shows the trend of exports and imports (in Rs. Crores) over the 1
years 2013-14 to 2021-22.
Which of the following statements is NOT correct according to the given
graph?
A. Imports remained constant throughout the period from 2013-14 to 2021-22.
B. Exports and imports both showed an upward trend after 2016-17.
C. There was no significant change in exports between 2013-14 and 2016-17
D. Imports increased significantly compared to exports from 2016-17 to 2021-
22.
The following question is for Visually Impaired Candidates only in lieu of
Question No. 8
Which one of these statements about India’s trade is true?
A. China and other East Asian countries are major competitors in India’s
exports.
B. India faces no competition in engineering goods exports.
C. Manufacturing contributes very little to India’s total exports.
D. Gems and jewellery are not part of India’s foreign trade.
9 There are four distinct phases of population growth identified in India over 1
the last one century. Identify the phase from the given description.
The growth rate of country’s population though remained high, has started
slowing down gradually. A downward trend of crude birth rate is held
responsible for such a population growth. This was in turn affected by an
increase in the mean age at marriage, improved quality of life particularly
education of females in the country. The growth rate of population is however
still high in the country.
A. Phase I (1901- 1921)
B. Phase II (1921- 1951)
C. Phase III (1951-1981)
D. Phase IV (1981 to till present)

--- Page 106 ---
10 Why do regions with lower economic development often show higher work 1
participation rates?
A. More manual labor is required for subsistence activities
B. They have more IT industries
C. Their literacy rate is higher
D. They have higher urbanization
11 The Intensive Agricultural District Programme (IADP) and Intensive 1
Agricultural Area Programme (IAAP) were launched to:
A. Introduce HYVs of wheat and rice
B. Overcome stagnation in agricultural production during late 1950s
C. Export surplus foodgrains to other countries
D. Promote cash crops over food crops
12 Which of the following statements about agricultural land use in India between 1
1950-51 and 2014-15 is correct based on the table?
A. The percentage of culturable waste land as part of total cultivable land
increased, while net area sown as a percentage decreased.
B. Total cultivable land as a percentage of reporting area dropped steeply, while
fallow other than current fallow increased as a percentage of total cultivable
land.
C. The share of culturable waste land and fallow (other than current fallow) both
declined as a percentage of reporting area, while current fallow and net area
sown increased.
D. Current fallow land and net area sown both fell as a percentage of reporting
area, while the total cultivable land as a percentage of reporting area rose.
13 Consider the following statements about the implementation of the Atal Bhujal 1
Yojana (Atal Jal):
1. It focuses on bringing behavioural changes among communities in
water-stressed areas.
2. It aims to shift the attitude of people from water consumption to
conservation.
3. It seeks to improve groundwater management through community
participation.
4. It includes both urban and rural regions of all Indian states.
A. 1, 2 and 3 only
B. 1, 3 and 4 only
C. 2, 3 and 4 only
D. 1, 2, 3 and 4

--- Page 107 ---
14 The district administration of Alwar, Rajasthan has taken up constructions of 1
various water harvesting structures such as percolation tanks, dug out ponds
(Johad), check dams, etc., through people’s participation.
Which of the following program is related to this?
A. Neeru Meeru
B. Haryali
C. Arvary Pani Sansad
D. Jal Kranti Abhiyan
15 Assertion (A): A geothermal energy plant has been commissioned at Manikaran 1
in Himachal Pradesh.
Reason (R): Manikaran has natural hot springs that can be used to generate
geothermal energy.
Options:
A. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, and Reason (R) is the correct
explanation of Assertion (A).
B. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not the correct
explanation of Assertion (A).
C. Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.
D. Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true.
16 Match the Trans–Continental Railway (Column A) with its route (Column B): 1
Column A (Trans–Continental Column B (Route)
Railway)
a. Australian Trans–Continental 1. St. Petersburg → Vladivostok
Railway
b. Trans–Siberian Railway 2. Perth → Sydney
c. The Orient Express 3. Paris → Istanbul
d. Union and Pacific Railway 4. New York → San Francisco
A. a-3, b-4, c-1, d-2
B. a-2, b-1, c-3, d-4
C. a-1, b-2, c-3, d-4
D. a-4, b-1, c-2, d-3
17 Consider the following statements about Pawan Hans Limited: 1
1. It provides helicopter services mainly for the petroleum sector and
tourism.
2. It plays an important role in providing connectivity in difficult terrains
and remote regions.
3. It operates helicopter services in hilly and remote areas of India.
4. It is widely used by tourists, particularly in the north-eastern region.
Which of the above statements are correct?
A. 1, and 4 only
B. 1, 2, 3 and 4
C. 1 and 2 only
D. 2, 3 and 4 only

--- Page 108 ---
SECTION-B
18 Read the given passage carefully and answer the questions that follows:
Benda lives in the wilds of the Abujh Maad area of central India. His village
consists of three huts deep in the wilds. Not even birds or stray dogs that usually
crowd villages can be seen in these areas. Wearing a small loin cloth and armed
with his axe he slowly surveys the penda (forest) where his tribe practices a
primitive form of agriculture called shifting cultivation. Benda and his friends
burn small patches of forest to clear them for cultivation. The ash is used for
making the soil fertile. Benda is happy that the Mahua trees around him are in
bloom. How lucky I am to be a part of this beautiful universe, he thinks as he
looks up to see the Mahua, Palash and Sal trees that have sheltered him since
childhood. Crossing the penda in a gliding motion, Benda makes his way to a
stream. As he bends down to scoop up a palmful of water, he remembers to
thank Loi-Lugi, the spirit of the forest for allowing him to quench his thirst.
Moving on with his friends, Benda chews on succulent leaves and roots. The
boys have been trying to collect Gajjhara and Kuchla, from the forest. These are
special plants that Benda and his people use. He hopes the spirits of the forest
will be kind and lead him to these herbs. These are needed to barter in the
madhai or tribal fair coming up the next full moon. He closes his eyes and tries
hard to recall what the elders had taught him about these herbs and the places
they are found in. He wishes he had listened more carefully. Suddenly there is a
rustling of leaves. Benda and his friends know it is the outsiders who have come
searching for them in the wilds. In a single fluid motion Benda and his friends
disappear behind the thick canopy of trees and become one with the spirit of the
forest.
i. Name the type of human nature relationship described in the passage. 1
ii. Identify the type of agriculture practiced by Benda’s tribe in the Abujh Maad 1
region.
iii. State the purpose for which Benda and his friends collect Gajjhara and 1
Kuchla.
19 Read the given passage carefully and answer the questions that follows:
Countries can be classified into four groups on the basis of the human
development scores earned by them. Countries with very high human
development index are those which have a score of over 0.800. According to the
Human Development Report of 2023-24, this group includes 69 countries. High
level of human development group has 49 countries. Providing education and
healthcare is an important government priority. Countries with higher human
development are those where a lot of investment in the social sector has taken
place. Altogether, a higher investment in people and good governance has set
this group of countries apart from the others.
You will notice that many of these countries have been the former imperial
powers. The degree of social diversity in these countries is not very high. Many
of the countries with a high human development score are located in Europe and

--- Page 109 ---
represent the industrialised western world. Yet there are striking numbers of
non-European countries also who have made it to this list.
Countries with medium levels of human development form the largest group.
There are 42 countries in the medium level of human development. Most of
these are countries which have emerged in the period after the Second World
War. Some countries from this group were former colonies while many others
have emerged after the break-up of the erstwhile Soviet Union in 1990. Many of
these countries have been rapidly improving their human development
score by adopting more people-oriented policies and reducing social
discrimination. Most of these countries have a much higher social diversity than
the countries with higher human development scores. faced political instability
and social uprisings at some point of time in their recent history.
As many as 33 countries record low levels of human development. A large
proportion of these are small countries which have been going through political
turmoil and social instability in the form of civil war, famine or a high incidence
of diseases. There is an urgent need to address the human development
requirements of this group through well thought out policies.
i. Specify the factors that distinguish nations with higher human
development from others. 1
ii. Identify the major global event responsible for the formation of
many medium human development nations. 1
iii. State the major issues commonly faced by nations with low human
development. 1
SECTION-C
20 Define the term outsourcing. What are the consequences of outsourcing? 3
21 Examine the economic significance of the Trans–Canadian Railway. 3
22 Explain the main objective of the Smart Cities Mission and how it aims to 3
improve the quality of urban life.
23 “The period 1901–1921 is referred to as a period of stagnant or stationary 3
population growth in India.” Explain the statement by giving three reasons.
OR
Explain the objectives of the national youth policy adopted by the Government
of India in 2014.
SECTION-D
24 “Unlike nomadic herding, commercial livestock rearing is more organised and 5
capital intensive”. Substantiate the given statement by giving any five reasons.
OR
“Mining plays a key role in human development.” Discuss the methods of
mining and how its impacts vary between developed and developing nations.

--- Page 110 ---
25 Differentiate between “Household or Cottage Manufacturing and Small-Scale 5
Manufacturing”.
OR
Major concentrations of modern manufacturing have flourished in a few
numbers of places. Explain with examples.
26 “Human beings pollute the water through industrial and agricultural activities”. 5
Explain the main causes of water pollution with special reference to industrial
and agricultural activities.
OR
Why is the urban waste disposal being a serious problem in India? Explain.
27 Study the table showing the composition of India’s exports since 5
2015-2021 and answer the question.
“The composition of commodities in India’s international trade has been
undergoing a change over the years.” Analyse the statement.
28 Describe the objectives and benefits of the Drought-Prone Area Programme in 5
improving dryland farming in India.
OR
The Indira Gandhi Canal Project has changed the agricultural scenario of
Rajasthan. Justify the statement by suggesting the positive and negative impacts
of irrigation on the Indira Gandhi Canal Command Area.

--- Page 111 ---
SECTION-E
29 On the given political map of the World, seven geographical features have 5
been marked as A, B, C, D, E, F and G. Identify any five with the help of
the following information and write their correct names.
A. A Major Airport
B. An Area of Nomadic Herding
C. An Area of extensive commercial grain farming
D.A major sea port
E.A shipping canal
F. Area of dairy farming
G. A terminal railway station
The following questions are for Visually Impaired Candidates only in lieu
of Question No.29. Answer any five questions out of the following:
A. Name the major Airport of chili.
B. Name the nomadic herding area of Africa continent.
C. Name the area of extensive commercial grain farming in South Africa.
D. Name the international airport of USA located near Gulf of Mexico
E. Name the shipping canal which connect Pacific Ocean from Atlantic Ocean
F. Area of dairy farming located in south of Australia
G. Name the western terminal station Australian Continental railway
30 Locate and label any five of the following geographical features on the 5
Political Outline map of India with appropriate symbols:
A. An important bauxite mine in Odisha.
B. Westernmost seaport of India
C. An oil refinery in Uttar Pradesh
D. The state with lowest population density.
E. The state leading in the production of coffee
F. An international airport in Punjab.
G. An important copper mine in Rajasthan
The following questions are for visually impaired students in lieu of
Question No.30. Attempt any five.
A. Name an important bauxite mine in Odisha.
B. Name Westernmost seaport of India
C. Name an oil refinery in Uttar Pradesh
D. Name the state with lowest population density.
E. Name the state leading in the production of coffee
F. Name the international airport in Punjab.
G. Name an important copper mine in Rajasthan

--- Page 113 ---
30.
